Vol:.(1234567890)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10278-024-01136-4
Gradient‑Based Saliency Maps Are Not Trustworthy Visual
Explanations of Automated AI Musculoskeletal Diagnoses
Kesavan Venkatesh1   · Simukayi Mutasa2 · Fletcher Moore2 · Jeremias Sulam1   · Paul H. Yi2
Received: 8 February 2024 / Revised: 30 April 2024 / Accepted: 1 May 2024 / Published online: 6 May 2024
© The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Society for Imaging Informatics in Medicine 2024
Abstract
Saliency maps are popularly used to “explain” decisions made by modern machine learning models, including deep con-
volutional neural networks (DCNNs). While the resulting heatmaps purportedly indicate important image features, their
“trustworthiness,” i.e., utility and robustness, has not been evaluated for musculoskeletal imaging. The purpose of this
study was to systematically evaluate the trustworthiness of saliency maps used in disease diagnosis on upper extremity
X-ray images. The underlying DCNNs were trained using the Stanford MURA dataset. We studied four trustworthiness
criteria—(1) localization accuracy of abnormalities, (2) repeatability, (3) reproducibility, and (4) sensitivity to underlying
DCNN weights—across six different gradient-based saliency methods (Grad-CAM (GCAM), gradient explanation (GRAD),
integrated gradients (IG), Smoothgrad (SG), smooth IG (SIG), and XRAI). Ground-truth was defined by the consensus of
three fellowship-trained musculoskeletal radiologists who each placed bounding boxes around abnormalities on a holdout
saliency test set. Compared to radiologists, all saliency methods showed inferior localization (AUPRCs: 0.438 (SG)–0.590
(XRAI); average radiologist AUPRC: 0.816), repeatability (IoUs: 0.427 (SG)–0.551 (IG); average radiologist IOU: 0.613),
and reproducibility (IoUs: 0.250 (SG)–0.502 (XRAI); average radiologist IOU: 0.613) on abnormalities such as fractures,
orthopedic hardware insertions, and arthritis. Five methods (GCAM, GRAD, IG, SG, XRAI) passed the sensitivity test.
Ultimately, no saliency method met all four trustworthiness criteria; therefore, we recommend caution and rigorous evalu-
ation of saliency maps prior to their clinical use.
Keywords  Saliency methods · Trustworthy AI · Musculoskeletal radiology · Deep learning
Introduction
Deep learning algorithms are being increasingly explored for
their potential to assist radiologists in disease diagnosis from
medical images [1]. A class of these algorithms known as deep
convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) map input images to
output classifications by using convolutional filters that spa-
tially process image information [2]. Different DCNNs are
characterized by architectural differences such as the different
kinds of layers used (e.g., residual layers, auxiliary networks),
the depth of the network, the order of the layers, among other
architectural choices. DCNNs have had success on a variety
of radiology tasks, ranging from abnormality classification on
chest X-rays [3, 4] to brain tumor segmentation [5].
As deep learning algorithms transition from academic
innovations to clinically implemented tools, the capacity to
interpret model predictions (i.e., understand why and how
a decision was made) is increasingly important in order to
build physician trust in an algorithm [6]. This is an impor-
tant challenge in the AI research community given the
“black-box” nature of many deep learning algorithms. For
example, DCNNs trained to diagnose disease from X-ray
images taken at one hospital have not necessarily general-
ized to other hospital settings because models can incor-
rectly focus on confounding signals (e.g., hardware meta-
data) rather than clinical features [7]. Model interpretability
can help engineers and physicians debug these issues before
reaching clinical deployment, or even reduce the amount of
samples required for training [8].
*	 Paul H. Yi
pyi@som.umaryland.edu
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA
University of Maryland Medical Intelligent Imaging (UM2ii)
Center, Department of Diagnostic Radiology and Nuclear
Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 520
W Lombard St, Baltimore, MD, USA
Saliency methods are the current standard to produce
visual explanations of a DCNN’s decision-making. These
methods generate post hoc—i.e., after training the DCNN—
heatmaps that quantify at the pixel level which regions were
considered significant during classification of an image.
These were initially, and continue to be, employed to sup-
plement DCNN predictions with visual intuitions of “why”
these decisions were made [3, 9–12]. However, recent stud-
ies have underscored issues with saliency maps as reliable
explanation tools. Adebayo et al. and Zhang et al. established
that common saliency methods are not resistant to pertur-
bations in the input image [13, 14]. Arun et al. proposed a
framework for quantifying the “trustworthiness” of saliency
maps in the context of chest X-ray diagnosis. The constitu-
ent criteria included localization of disease abnormalities,
a fundamental measurement that probed whether saliency
heatmaps aligned with clinical reasoning [15].
One remaining question from these studies is how notions
of saliency map trustworthiness apply to different clini-
cal data types, especially since the prevailing analysis has
focused on chest X-rays [14, 16]. Jin et al. approached this
from a perspective of multi-model imaging: the authors ana-
lyzed if saliency maps carry information relevant to a par-
ticular MRI modality [17]. The results suggested that many
saliency methods failed to correlate for modality-specific
features. However, the alternative perspective remains to
be explored: how saliency maps compare between different
clinical presentations within the same modality and task.
The purpose of our study was to systematically evaluate
the trustworthiness of saliency maps as visual explanations
for deep learning algorithms that identify abnormalities on
upper extremity radiographs. To our knowledge, this kind
of analysis has not yet been explored in the context of mus-
culoskeletal X-rays. We additionally probed how saliency
trustworthiness differed across disease subtypes. Taken with
the insights from Jin et al. [17], these experiments can shape
a more comprehensive picture of how saliency maps vary
across clinical presentations.
Materials and Methods
Data
Our experiments used the Stanford MURA dataset [18]: a
large open-source collection of musculoskeletal radiograph
studies made available for research use by Rajpurkar et al.
in 2018. All radiographs were obtained from the Picture
Archive and Communications System at the Stanford Hos-
pital between 2001 and 2012 and were de-identified prior
to public release. At the time of initial interpretation, board-
certified Stanford radiologists annotated each radiographic
study with a binary label indicating whether an abnormality
was present. Rajpurkar et al. retrospectively collected these
studies and divided the overall dataset into a training set
(13,457 studies, 36,808 images), validation set (1199 stud-
ies, 3197 images), and test set (207 studies, 556 images),
ensuring no patient overlap. However, only the training set
and validation set were publicly released; the original test
set was hidden for online competition purposes.
We only used the publicly available MURA data—i.e.,
the original training and validation sets—to train predic-
tive DCNN models. Our training set was taken identically
from the original dataset. We divided the originally provided
validation set using a 60/40% split at the patient level to cre-
ate our own validation and testing sets. A patient level split
was done to avoid data leakage between the splits. Table 1
provides a complete description of our training, validation,
and testing sets.
Our institutional review board acknowledged our study
as non-human subjects research because our work used pub-
licly available data only.
Table 1   Description of (1)
in-house training/validation/
testing splits by number of
images, studies, patients, and
distribution of anatomical
regions and (2) the saliency
test set by number of
images, studies, patients, and
distribution of anatomical
regions and abnormality
subgroups
Training set
Validation set
Testing set
Saliency test set
Number of images
36,808
Number of studies
13,457
Number of patients
11,184
Region, n (%)
Elbow
4931 (13.4)
274 (14.5)
191 (14.6)
95 (16.2)
Finger
5106 (13.9)
278 (14.7)
183 (14.0)
105 (17.9)
Forearm
1825 (5.0)
176 (9.3)
125 (9.5)
61 (10.4)
Hand
5543 (15.1)
273 (14.5)
187 (14.3)
63 (10.7)
Humerus
1272 (3.5)
173 (9.2)
115 (8.8)
56 (9.5)
Shoulder
8379 (22.8)
332 (17.6)
231 (17.6)
108 (18.4)
Wrist
9752 (26.5)
380 (20.1)
279 (21.3)
100 (17.0)
Subgroup, n (%)
Arthritis
n/a
n/a
n/a
197 (33.5)
Hardware/fracture
n/a
n/a
n/a
367 (62.4)
Other
n/a
n/a
n/a
24 (4.1)
Radiologist Annotations
We curated spatial annotations for a subset of MURA
radiographs to establish a clinical baseline for abnormality
identification. Three board-certified and fellowship-trained
musculoskeletal radiologists annotated where abnormalities
were present in each test set image that was in fact labeled
for presence of an abnormality (638 positive label images
out of 1311 test set images). Radiologists knew a priori each
image was positively labeled and were instructed to place
rectangles (and as needed, free-form polygons) surrounding
regions where they observed an abnormality. The ground-
truth annotation for each image was obtained by taking a
majority vote at the pixel level across the three radiologists’
annotations (Fig. 1a). After making these spatial annota-
tions, radiologists were finally instructed to provide a suc-
cinct textual description of the kind of abnormality. These
descriptions were not already available in the public MURA
release; we used this information in subgroup analysis of
saliency map trustworthiness.
For 50 of the 638 images, the derived ground-truth
annotation was empty. These were excluded from trust-
worthiness evaluations due to ambiguity; therefore, the
size of the annotated subset—i.e., “saliency test set”—was
588 images (Table 1). The remaining images were tagged
with one of three musculoskeletal abnormality subgroups:
arthritis, hardware/fracture, or “other.” Tagging was based
on one radiologist’s textual annotation, and ambiguities
were clarified based on annotations from the other two
radiologists. Hardware and fracture cases were combined
due to frequent co-occurrence. The “other” category
included tumors, lacerations, effusions, metaphyseal lucent
lines, and amputations. This curated saliency test set was
used in trustworthiness experiments.
DCNN Training and Evaluation
We trained DCNNs to predict the presence of an abnor-
mality from individual radiographs. Our base classifi-
cation models were DCNNs fine-tuned from ImageNet
weights. We used the InceptionV3 [19] and DenseNet169
[20] architectures due to their prior success on medical
imaging tasks [3, 4, 18, 21] and previous use in saliency
map trustworthiness evaluations for chest X-ray diag-
nosis [15]. Standard data augmentation and preprocess-
ing routines were consistently applied for input images
(see Supplemental S.1 for details). Images were resized
to 320 × 320 pixels to match prior experiments with the
MURA dataset [18]. Hyperparameters were selected to
maximize area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC) on our validation set (Supplemental S.1).
Once optimal hyperparameters were identified, four final
Fig. 1   Overview of trustworthiness framework. Images were anno-
tated (a) by a team of musculoskeletal-trained radiologists and a con-
sensus annotation was derived using a pixel-level majority vote. Four
trustworthiness criteria—localization accuracy (b), heatmap consist-
ency (includes both repeatability and reproducibility) (c), and heat-
map sensitivity (d)—were quantitatively proposed and evaluated
models—three InceptionV3s and one DenseNet169—were
trained on the union of our training and validation sets.
All DCNNs were evaluated on the testing set, which
consisted of radiographic studies distinct from those in
the training and validation sets. This lack of image over-
lap ensures that the following test statistics were unbiased
and independent (from, for example, hyperparameter tun-
ing on the validation set). For each anatomical region, the
AUROC, accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores were
computed at the threshold yielding maximum accuracy.
An overall weighted AUROC (wAUROC) was reported
as the weighted average of individual anatomical region
AUROCs. The weights were the proportion of abnormal
test set images from each anatomical region. Other metrics
were micro-averaged to yield overall performance metrics.
Bootstrapping with 1000 resamples was implemented to
estimate 95% confidence intervals for each metric. Pair-
wise Tukey tests were used to statistically compare DCNN
classification performance. Model training and statistical
analyses were done using Python.
Trustworthiness Evaluation
We measured the “trustworthiness” of saliency maps in visu-
alizing DCNN abnormality predictions on a musculoskeletal
radiograph. Our operative definition of “trustworthiness”
was adapted from Arun et al. [15]. We examined four cri-
teria (described in the following subsections): (1) locali-
zation accuracy, (2) repeatability, (3) reproducibility, and
(4) sensitivity (Fig. 1). We additionally contribute a novel
formulation of weak and strong versions for the first three
criteria that represent sanity checks and radiologist-level
comparisons, respectively. All trustworthiness experiments
employed only images from the saliency test set, i.e., the
annotated subset of positive label images in the test set.
Six saliency gradient-based methods were tested: gradi-
ent-weighted class activation mapping (GCAM) [22], gradi-
ent explanation (GRAD) [23], integrated gradients (IG) [24],
Smoothgrad (SG) [25], smooth integrated gradients (SIG)
[24, 25], and XRAI (XRAI) [26]. (Guided BackProp [27] and
Guided GradCAM [22, 28] were excluded because Adebayo
et al. [13] showed these methods lacked sensitivity to higher-
level network weights. Hooker et al. [29] additionally showed
that Guided BackProp had worse feature importance estimations
than random assignment.) To ensure fair comparisons, saliency
maps were preprocessed before conducting experiments to
match the radiologists’ annotation styles (Supplementary S.2).
Localization Accuracy
Localization measured the spatial concordance between
heatmaps and ground-truth annotations. Saliency maps
were derived from the best-performing InceptionV3
classifier (as determined by wAUROC). We quantified
localization accuracy using the pixel-level AUPRC dis-
tribution between ground-truth annotations and saliency
maps (Fig. 1b). To fairly evaluate the clinical utility of
saliency localizations, we only considered radiographs in
the saliency test set that were correctly classified by the
InceptionV3 DCNN. Indeed, if the underlying prediction
was incorrect, there is a confounding factor that can limit
saliency map localization accuracy.
In the weak version of this criteria, we compared the
localization accuracy of saliency maps to that of raw images
passed through a Canny edge detector [30] (with additional
preprocessing similar to the saliency maps). The ration-
ale was that saliency maps should be at least as accurate
as an edge detector that can only identify edge-patterned
abnormalities without any learning. In the strong version,
we compared against the average of each radiologist’s
localization accuracy with respect to the consensus anno-
tation. Pairwise Tukey tests were performed to determine
if saliency map AUPRCs were statistically higher than or
comparable to that of its associated comparison in the weak
and strong versions, respectively. Additionally, tests were
performed at the abnormality subgroup level to identify
potential hidden stratification.
Heatmap Consistency
Heatmap consistency included both repeatability and
reproducibility scores. Repeatability tests evaluated the
consistency of saliency maps between two InceptionV3
DCNNs. In contrast, reproducibility scores measured the
consistency of saliency maps between an InceptionV3 and
DenseNet169 DCNN. The two best-performing Incep-
tionV3 DCNNs were chosen for repeatability experi-
ments, and the best InceptionV3 was chosen to compare
against the DenseNet169 for reproducibility experi-
ments. In both cases, the compared models had similar
weighted AUROCs. We quantified consistency using the
structural similarity index measure (SSIM), intersection-
over-union (IoU), and binarized pixel error. This com-
bination of metrics evaluated the similarity of saliency
maps from three distinct perspectives: spatial structural
information, regional overlap, and naïve per-pixel accu-
racy (Fig. 1c). In the weak formulation, we compared
each metric’s mean to a fixed threshold of 0.5. A saliency
method passed the weak criteria only if every metric was
significantly greater (in the case of SSIM and IoU) or
lesser (in the case of pixel error) than this threshold. In
the strong version, we set the threshold to be the mean
radiologist concordance with ground-truth annotations. A
saliency method passed the strong criteria if each metric
was not significantly lesser (in the case of SSIM and IoU)
or greater (in the case of pixel error) than its radiologist-
derived threshold. One-sample one-sided t-tests were per-
formed to make each comparison.
Heatmap Sensitivity
Heatmap sensitivity examined how saliency maps changed
in response to randomization of the underlying model
weights. Trustworthy saliency methods should demonstrate
variance with respect to the trained DCNN: if successive
DCNN layers are reinitialized to random values, then the
associated saliency maps should degrade in quality. This
process of accumulated randomization is known as cascad-
ing randomization [13, 15]. We evaluated this condition
on the InceptionV3 architecture over a small subset of 100
images from the saliency test set. Three InceptionV3s were
each divided into 17 layers and successively randomized
from top (i.e., the logit layer) to the bottom (i.e., the first
convolutional layer). At each step, saliency maps from a
partially randomized model were compared using SSIM
to those of its non-randomized fully trained parent model
(Fig. 1d). The sequence of SSIM distributions was plotted
to visualize the effects of cascading randomization.
The sensitivity criterion was obtained by comparing the
similarity scores of the fully randomized model to a saliency
method-specific degradation threshold. This threshold was
based on the average pairwise similarity of saliency maps
derived from the fully trained models. A saliency method
passed if its similarity scores were significantly lesser than the
degradation threshold; otherwise, the saliency methods dem-
onstrated unwanted invariance to model training. One-sample
one-sided t-tests were used to make these comparisons.
Results
The best-performing InceptionV3 model and the DenseNet169
model reported wAUROCs of 0.904 (LCI = 0.887, UCI = 0.921)
and 0.905 (LCI = 0.887, UCI = 0.922), respectively, on the
testing set (Table 2). No statistical differences were observed
between these wAUROCs (p > 0.1). These scores are compa-
rable to those reported in the original MURA study [18] and
more recent experiments [31].
All saliency methods passed the weak localization test
and failed the strong localization test (Fig. 2a). XRAI
scored the highest localization AUPRC (mean = 0.590,
SD = 0.154), and SG scored the lowest (mean = 0.438,
SD = 0.203). Comparisons against the edge detec-
tor baseline (mean = 0.191, SD = 0.159) and radiolo-
gist annotations (mean = 0.816, SD = 0.100) were sig-
nificant (p < 0.001). Stratified analysis by the kind of
abnormality revealed that hardware/fracture cases had
better heatmap localizations compared to arthritis cases
(Fig. 2b). These differences were prominent for IG,
where the difference in mean AUPRC between hardware
and arthritis cases was 0.174 (hardware, mean = 0.557,
SD = 0.207; arthritis, mean = 0.383, SD = 0.248). None-
theless, despite this observed hidden stratification, sali-
ency methods continued to pass the weak localization
test and fail the strong localization test at the subgroup
level. (All localization scores are available in table form
in Supplementary S.3.)
Heatmap consistency demonstrated a dichotomy between
repeatability (Fig. 3a) and reproducibility (Fig. 3b). Four
saliency methods passed the weak repeatability criterion:
GRAD, IG, SIG, and XRAI. The other two methods failed
only because their mean IoU scores fell below the 0.5 thresh-
old (GCAM, IoU: mean = 0.459, SD = 0.228; SG, IoU:
mean = 0.427, SD = 0.218). However, no saliency method
passed the weak reproducibility criteria; each was only
constrained by the IoU condition. For example, XRAI was
the closest to passing (SSIM: mean = 0.784, SD = 0.176;
IoU: mean = 0.502, SD = 0.284; pixel error: mean = 0.183,
SD = 0.165) but the IoU score distribution was not sig-
nificantly greater than 0.5 (p > 0.05). No saliency method
passed either the strong repeatability or reproducibility cri-
teria. Indeed, the strong thresholds ( tSSIM = 0.951, tIoU =
0.613, tPxlErr = 0.034) together posed a stringent requirement
on heatmap consistency. (All repeatability and reproducibil-
ity scores are available in table form in Supplementary S.3.)
Table 2   DCNN classification performances of the four DCNNs
(three InceptionV3s and one DenseNet169) used in trustworthiness
experiments, as measured by anatomical region-weighted AUROC
(wAUROC) and Cohen’s kappa statistic. One thousand-sample
bootstrapping was implemented to obtain 95% confidence intervals
(lower-bound, LCI; upper-bound, UCI). Superscript letters indicate
statistical comparisons within the same metric using pairwise Tukey
tests at 훼= 0.05 significance level
DCNN architecture
Weighted AUROC (wAUROC)
Cohen’s kappa statistic
Mean
LCI
UCI
Mean
LCI
UCI
InceptionV3
0.904a
0.887
0.921
0.680c
0.641
0.719
0.902b
0.884
0.918
0.689b
0.649
0.726
0.898c
0.880
0.914
0.680c
0.641
0.717
DenseNet169
0.905a
0.887
0.922
0.701a
0.658
0.736
Saliency methods generally demonstrated sensitivity to
model randomization (Fig. 4). Five out of six saliency meth-
ods (all except SIG) had statistically lesser SSIM scores for
the fully randomized model compared to the degradation
threshold. This difference was largest for GRAD ( tGRAD =
0.768, mean = 0.647, SD = 0.068) and GCAM ( tGCAM = 0.579,
mean = 0.469, SD = 0.097). Although SIG failed the test,
SSIM scores did fall below the degradation threshold ( tSIG =
0.721, mean = 0.720, SD = 0.092), suggesting that SIG sensi-
tivity could have benefited from more InceptionV3 iterations.
The impact on cascading randomization on heatmap qual-
ity was observed alongside the change in weighted AUROC
(Fig. 5). This provides a useful context for the cascading ran-
domization plots: non-monotonicity and non-uniformity in
layerwise changes in SSIM were coupled with similar patterns
in classification performance. (All sensitivity scores are avail-
able in table form in Supplementary S.3.)
Discussion
Although saliency maps have been used widely for
explainability and disease localization in AI for radiol-
ogy, their trustworthiness has been called into question
[13, 15, 16]. In this study, we evaluated the trustworthiness
of six state-of-the-art saliency methods for the diagnosis
of abnormalities on upper extremity radiographs. Trust-
worthiness was defined as the combination of saliency
map localization, repeatability, reproducibility, and sen-
sitivity. For the first three criteria, we defined a weak ver-
sion, which served as a sanity check, and a strong version,
which enforced stricter conditions that correlate to human
performance. Finally, we identified hidden stratification
in localization accuracies by subgrouping the annotated
abnormalities into arthritis, hardware/fracture, and extra-
neous cases. Our trustworthiness results are summarized
in Table 3.
All six saliency methods passed the weak localization
criterion but failed the strong version, suggesting they
possessed non-trivial yet sub-radiologist disease localization
capacity. This finding is consistent with studies of saliency
map localization on chest X-rays. Saporta et  al. [16]
found that localization of chest X-ray pathologies present
in CheXpert [32] was significantly worse than human
benchmarks, and Arun et al. [15] found that localization
of both pneumothorax and pneumonia was inferior to
specifically trained segmentation or object-detecting
DCNNs, respectively. We also found that XRAI was the best
localizing saliency method; this agrees with the results from
Arun et al. [15] and is likely due to the recursive scheme
of the XRAI method [26]. It is important to note that our
analysis of localization excludes instances of inaccurate
DCNN predictions—that is, only if the image was correctly
classified do we evaluate localization accuracy. This
mitigated the potential for DCNN errors to confound our
analysis of saliency methods.
We also identified disparities in localization perfor-
mance based on the kind of abnormality. These results ech-
oed the take-home points from Oakden-Rayner et al. [33]:
schema completion—i.e., assigning more complete subclass
labels beneath the superclass—often reveals label imbal-
ances that correlate to uneven AI performance across these
labels. In our study, we extended these insights to saliency
map efficacy. Hardware/fracture cases had higher saliency
Fig. 2   Localization scores reported for saliency methods at the a
aggregate level and b abnormality subgroup level (color legend: blue,
hardware/fractures; orange, arthritis; green, other). Saliency methods
(including edge detector and inter-radiologist baselines) are plotted
along the horizontal axis, and the vertical axis plots pixel-level area
under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC). Box-plots display median,
interquartile range, and outliers. (a) Superscript letters indicate statisti-
cal comparisons between (a) saliency methods (including edge-detector
and inter-radiologist baseline) or (b) subgroups within each saliency
method using pairwise Tukey tests at 훼= 0.05 significance level
localization AUROCs than arthritis cases. We posit this was
likely due to the sharper contours of fractures and clearer
boundaries for metalwork relative to arthritis presenta-
tion. Similar findings of hidden stratification in saliency
localization based on the disease pathology have been shown
by Saporta et al. [16]; our study builds on this by clearly
highlighting an instance of hidden stratification that be dan-
gerous in AI visualization.
Fig. 3   Saliency method a repeatability and b reproducibility, as measured by SSIM (left panel), IoU (middle panel), and pixel error (right panel).
Superscript letters indicate statistical comparisons between saliency methods using pairwise Tukey tests at 훼= 0.05 significance level
We showed that saliency methods differentiate between
repeatability and reproducibility. While most saliency meth-
ods passed the weak repeatability test, all failed the weak
reproducibility test. In other words, saliency maps for a single
image notably differed based on the underlying DCNN archi-
tecture (i.e., InceptionV3 vs. DenseNet121), despite similar
classification performance. GCAM and SG struggled on
both kinds of heatmap consistency evaluations. This partially
concords with the results presented by Arun et al. [15], where
SG exhibited similar struggles on repeatability and reproduc-
ibility. Differences for other methods might be due to domain-
specific phenomena, i.e., chest versus musculoskeletal X-rays.
However, in concordance with the overall conclusion from
Arun et al. [15], we found that no saliency method passed a
strong repeatability or reproducibility test. The inability to
pass strong repeatability and reproducibility criteria indicates
Fig. 4   Saliency method sensi-
tivity to model weights as meas-
ured by cascading randomiza-
tion (color legend: red, GCAM;
dark blue, GRAD; yellow, IG;
green, SG; light blue/teal, SIG;
purple, XRAI). Dotted horizon-
tal lines indicate the associated
saliency method’s degradation
threshold. Sequential randomi-
zation layers are plotted along
the horizontal axis (begin-
ning with the non-randomized
model), and the SSIM relative
to non-randomized heatmaps is
plotted along the vertical axis
Fig. 5   GradCAM sensitivity
(red, left vertical axis) and
DCNN classifier wAUC (blue,
right vertical axis) as a function
of cascading randomization
layer (horizontal axis)
that radiologist annotations were significantly more consistent
than deep learning-derived saliency maps.
Every saliency method except for SIG demonstrated sen-
sitivity to DCNN training. Arun et al. [15] similarly found
that most saliency methods performed well on the weight
randomization task. The only discrepancy between the
results was with SIG, and this difference might be due to
distribution-dependent effects on the randomization task,
as critiqued by Yona and Greenfeld [34].
There are a few limitations in this study. First, the
MURA dataset proved occasionally difficult to annotate
for disease abnormality. Since the dataset is structured into
studies, i.e., groups of images, one image alone may not
have elucidated the abnormality apparent in the patient.
Therefore, the annotated test set likely contained some
views of a patient that did not highlight the abnormal-
ity that was known to exist. We accommodated this by
removing those views from the saliency test set. Second,
we only studied two DCNN architectures, InceptionV3 and
DenseNet, in our reproducibility tests. The chosen archi-
tectures have been widely used in medical imaging stud-
ies with state-of-the-art performance; prior work by Arun
et al. [15] similarly used these two base architectures for
evaluating saliency maps on chest X-rays. Finally, we only
studied the properties of gradient-based saliency methods,
since these are the current state-of-art in visual explana-
tion. Newer approaches such as SHAP [35] and h-SHAP
[36] (which have more precise theoretical foundations
[37]), as well as directly trained saliency maps [38], can
be analyzed under this framework in future work.
Conclusions
Evaluating the trustworthiness of saliency methods used for
diagnostic deep learning algorithms on upper extremity radi-
ographs demonstrated that saliency methods critically suffer
in localization capacity, repeatability, and reproducibility,
as compared to radiologist annotations of disease. Saliency
methods also demonstrate hidden stratification wherein
abnormalities with clearer contours, such as hardware inserts
and fractures, have better localization accuracy as opposed
to less localized pathologies, such as arthritis. These results
suggest that saliency methods may not be fully ready for
clinical use, and more work must be done to make deep
learning interpretations truly “trustworthy” before they are
deployed in clinical diagnostic settings.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10278-​024-​01136-4.
Author Contribution  All authors contributed to the study conception
and design. Material preparation, data collection, and analysis were
performed by K.V. The first draft of the manuscript was written by K.V.
and all authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding  This work was supported by the Johns Hopkins Biomedical
Engineering Leong Undergraduate Research Fund. J.S. is supported by
NSF CAREER Award CCF 2239787.
Code and Data Availability  We make our code repository available
upon publication at https://​github.​com/​kvenk​atesh5/​salie​ncy-​trust​worth​
iness. All imaging data used is in the public domain and available in
the references provided in the manuscript text.
Declarations
Ethics Approval  This study used publicly available data and was con-
sidered not human subjects research. Therefore, institutional review
board review was waived.
Competing Interests  The authors declare no competing interests.