Trustworthy Convolutional Neural Networks:
A Gradient Penalized-based Approach
Nicholas Halliwell
Inria, Sophia Antipolis, France
nicholas.halliwell@inria.fr
Freddy Lecue
CortAIx, Thales, Montreal, Canada
Inria, Sophia Antipolis, France
freddy.lecue@inria.fr
Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are commonly used for image classiﬁca-
tion. Saliency methods are examples of approaches that can be used to interpret
CNNs post hoc, identifying the most relevant pixels for a prediction following the
gradients ﬂow. Even though CNNs can correctly classify images, the underlying
saliency maps could be erroneous in many cases. This can result in skepticism as
to the validity of the model or its interpretation. We propose a novel approach for
training trustworthy CNNs by penalizing parameter choices that result in inaccurate
saliency maps generated during training. We add a penalty term for inaccurate
saliency maps produced when the predicted label is correct, a penalty term for
accurate saliency maps produced when the predicted label is incorrect, and a reg-
ularization term penalizing overly conﬁdent saliency maps. Experiments show
increased classiﬁcation performance, user engagement, and trust.
Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are used in computer vision for tasks such as object detec-
tion [25, 23, 24], image classiﬁcation [14], and visual question answering [4, 5]. The success of these
models has created a need for model transparency. Due to their complex structure, CNNs are often
difﬁcult to interpret. Features learned by CNNs can be visualized, but understanding the meaning of
these hidden representations can be difﬁcult for non-experts.
Indeed there are many approaches to interpreting the output of machine learning models [27, 26, 17, 3,
18, 12, 11, 7]. Saliency methods offer an intuitive way to understand what a CNN has learned. These
algorithms provide post hoc interpretations by highlighting a set of pixels or super pixels in the input
image that are most relevant for a prediction. Small changes to these highlighted pixels results in the
biggest change in predicted score. One of the ﬁrst saliency methods, Gradients (sometimes called
Vanilla Gradients) compute the gradient of the class score with respect to the input image [35]. Guided
BackPropagation [39] imputes the gradient of layers using ReLUs, backpropagating only positive
gradients. Class Activation Mapping (CAM) uses a speciﬁc architecture for CNNs to discriminate
regions of the input [44]. Grad-CAM generalizes CAM to any CNN architecture [31]. There exists
many different saliency methods [33, 34, 42, 37, 40, 19] to visually interpret CNN predictions. There
is existing work showing not all of these methods are robust [2], and that saliency maps can be
manipulated [8]. HINT [32] encourages deep neural networks to be sensitive to the same input
regions as humans. The authors of [28] add a penalty term for explanation predictions far away from
their respective ground truth. For future versions, potential baselines include [47, 6, 13]
On the task of image classiﬁcation, saliency methods allow the user to visually inspect the highlighted
regions of the image. The overlap between the saliency map and the object of interest can be easily
and quickly compared by users. This forms an intuitive way to interpret what a model has learned.
Saliency methods however can attribute relevant pixels outside the object of interest, producing
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2009.14260v1 [cs.LG] 29 Sep 2020
what we term an inaccurate saliency map. Indeed any of the saliency methods mentioned above can
encounter some form of this issue. This indicates the model has chosen a poor set of parameters.1 On
the contrary, an accurate saliency map attributes pixel values over the object of interest.
Convolutional neural networks are most commonly optimized by minimizing the cross entropy
between the target distribution and the predicted target distribution. This loss function is unaware that
the choice of parameters giving a correct prediction may result in inaccurate saliency maps shown
to the user. Conversely, parameters may be learned that give an incorrect prediction but result in a
visually accurate saliency map. Figure 1b shows an example where the predicted label is incorrect,
and the saliency map is inaccurate. Figure 1c shows an example where the predicted label is correct,
and the saliency map is accurate.
We propose a loss function that uniﬁes traditional loss functions with post hoc interpretation methods.
This function includes a penalty term for inaccurate saliency maps generated when the predicted class
is correct, a penalty term for accurate saliency maps generated when the prediction is incorrect, and a
penalty term for overly conﬁdent saliency maps. Indeed this involves computing predicted saliency
maps on the forward pass during training. We demonstrate these penalty terms can be added to the
existing loss of a pre-trained model to continue training, or used in a transfer learning framework to
improve post hoc saliency maps.
(a) Input Image: Cockroach
(b) VGG-16: Tick
(c) Proposed: Cockroach
Figure 1: VGG-16 incorrectly classiﬁes the input image, and the post hoc saliency map is inaccu-
rate.The trustworthy CNN correctly classiﬁes the image and produces an accurate saliency map.
Problem Setting
2.1
Prior Work
Consider a convolutional neural network f that classiﬁes an image xi into one of c ∈C classes. Let
yc be the true label c of an image xi. Let ˆy be xi’s predicted label from f, or equivalently ˆy = f(xi)c.
The cross entropy is thus given by
CE(y, ˆy) = 1
i=1
c=1
−1[yi = c] log(f(xi)c)
(1)
Two saliency methods of particular interest are Grad-CAM and Guided Grad-CAM [31]. Let A be
the activation maps of some convolutional layer, a given activation map denoted Ak. To produce a
saliency map for some xi, Grad-CAM computes the gradients of the target class with respect to layer
l’s activation maps. Global average pooling is performed on the gradients to serve as weights for
each activation map. These weights, denoted αc
k in equation 2 represent the importance of a given
activation map k for some target class c ∈C.
1We recognize it is also possible the saliency method is not robust. For this paper we focus on model induced
errors.
k =
W × H
∂yc
∂Ak
(2)
After computing a weighted combination of the activation maps, the resulting output is passed through
a ReLU. Here a ReLU is used to focus only on the features that have a positive inﬂuence on the true
class c, i.e. pixels whose intensity should be increased in order to increase yc [31]. The saliency map
output by Grad-CAM is thus given by
(Grad−CAM) = ReLU
kAk
(3)
Guided Grad-CAM [31] combines the output from Grad-CAM (equation 3) with the output from
Guided Backpropagation [39] through element-wise multiplication. This is done for two reasons;
First, Guided Backpropagation alone is not class discriminative. Second, Grad-CAM fails to produce
high resolution (ﬁne-grained) visualizations. Merging the two saliency methods produces saliency
maps that are both high resolution and class discriminative [31].
2.2
Shortcomings
Despite state-of-the-art classiﬁcation performance achieved by convolutional neural networks, loss
minimizing parameters may result in saliency maps that do not highlight relevant pixels over the object
of interest. Indeed the saliency map is dependent on the learned parameters. Parameters however are
learned without knowing if the resulting saliency maps are visually accurate. Additionally, showing an
inaccurate saliency map to a practitioner does not provide insight on how to change model parameters
to correctly highlight pixels over the object of interest.
As an example, take a pre-trained model VGG-16 [36], trained on the ImageNet dataset [29]. We use
Grad-CAM on selected images to identify relevant pixels. Figure 2 shows four different cases that can
be encountered when using saliency methods for interpretations. Figure 2b shows the case 1, where
the predicted label is correct, and the resulting saliency map is visually accurate. Figure 2g shows
case 2, where the predicted class is incorrect, and the resulting saliency map is correct. Figure 2l
shows case 3, the predicted class is correct, and the resulting saliency map is inaccurate. Figure 2q
shows case 4, where the predicted class is incorrect and the resulting saliency map is inaccurate.
Models giving inaccurate predictions (Figures 2g, 2q) and/or inaccurate saliency maps (Figures 2l, 2q)
will cause users to lose trust in the model. Currently, convolutional neural networks are optimized
ignoring how the saliency map will look post hoc. To our knowledge, no method exists to train
convolutional neural networks to produce visually accurate saliency maps. We propose a loss function
that penalizes inaccurate saliency maps, resulting in model parameters that produce visually accurate
saliency maps post hoc, and improved classiﬁcation performance, ensuring better user trust.
Trustworthy Convolutional Neural Networks
We deﬁne a trustworthy CNN as one that produces accurate predictions and visually accurate post
hoc saliency maps determined by user evaluation.
3.1
Loss function
To identify parameters that produce both accurate predictions and accurate saliency maps, constraints
must to be added to the cross entropy loss. Saliency maps produced post hoc can be visually accurate
while the model classiﬁes the observation incorrectly. Additionally, visually inaccurate saliency maps
can be produced while the model classiﬁes the observation correctly. Lastly, visually inaccurate
saliency maps can be observed while the model incorrectly classiﬁes the observation. The loss
function must consider the saliency maps produced from the parameter choices at each step taken by
the optimizer.
(a) True class:
Brambling
(b) Predicted class:
Brambling
(c) Predicted class:
Brambling
(d) Predicted class:
Brambling
(e) Predicted class:
Brambling
(f) True class:
Vulture
(g) Predicted class:
Kite
(h) Predicted class:
Vulture
(i) Predicted class:
Vulture
(j) Predicted class:
Vulture
(k) True class:
Pajama
(l) Predicted class:
Pajama
(m) Predicted class:
Pajama
(n) Predicted class:
Pajama
(o) Predicted class:
Pajama
(p) True class:
Sports car
Input image
(q) Predicted class:
Racer
Baseline
(r) Predicted class:
Sports car
Proposed (.01)
(s) Predicted class:
Sports car
Proposed (.1)
(t) Predicted class:
Sports car
Proposed (.3)
Figure 2: Input image shown with post hoc saliency maps from a VGG-16 baseline, and our proposed
gradient penalized based Trustworthy CNN model shown with various learning rates.
Take a saliency map ˆLc
(.)i generated by a saliency method on the forward pass of training. We average
the predicted saliency map across all dimensions. Given by equation 4, we use this penalty term to
gauge the conﬁdence of the predicted saliency map.
ˆSi =
W × H
w=1
h=1
ˆLc
(.)i
(4)
Adding the constraint of overly conﬁdent saliency maps generated during training does not penalize
interactions between the saliency maps and predicted labels. Further constraints are needed to account
for the predicted saliency map being accurate when the predicted label is incorrect, and the predicted
saliency map being inaccurate when the predicted label is correct. Equation 5 and 6 are added for the
interaction between the predicted class labels and predicted saliency map. Large gradient saliency
maps with corresponding incorrect predicted labels are penalized, along with small gradient saliency
maps with corresponding correct predicted labels.
R1 = CE(yi, ˆyi)(1 −ˆSi)
(5)
R2 = ˆSi(1 −CE(yi, ˆyi))
(6)
The ﬁnal loss function used for all plots and tables in this work is given by equation 7. We use a
scalar λ ∈[0, 1] to establish a dependence between ˆSi and the cross entropy CE. 2
L(y,ˆy, S) =
i=1
λCE(yi, ˆyi) + (1 −λ)Si + R1 + R2
(7)
The loss function we plan on using in future versions is given by
R1 = CE(yi, ˆyi)(1 −PWCE(Si, ˆSi))
(8)
R2 = PWCE(Si, ˆSi)(1 −CE(yi, ˆyi))
(9)
L(y,ˆy, S, ˆS) =
i=1
λCE(yi, ˆyi) + (1 −λ)PWCE(Si, ˆSi) + R1 + R2
(10)
where PWCE is the pixel-wise cross entropy between the ground truth saliency map and predicted
saliency map.
3.2
Training
To optimize the loss proposed in equation 7, we freeze the weights of all other layers in the network.
We use stochastic gradient descent in all our experiments, although any of its variants can be used.
Naturally, this loss function will be most effective in two settings; to update previously learned
parameters of a pre-trained model, or learn parameters of a newly added layer in a transfer learning
framework. Consider the following example, where a practitioner identiﬁes a layer in a convolutional
network that learns a noticeable systematic error. Our loss function allows practitioners to update the
layer weights, and eliminate these errors without having to re-train the model from scratch. In the
case of transfer learning, a new layer can be added and parameters can be learned that will produce
accurate saliency maps post hoc.
There are no restrictions on which saliency method can be used to produce the saliency maps Lc
(.)i
generated during training, provided the generated output when averaged is between zero and one.
Regarding choice of saliency method, some choices make more intuitive sense than others. For
example, Guided Backpropagation [39] and Deconvolutions [42] are not class discriminative, and
therefore should not be chosen.
Experimental Studies
4.1
Transfer Learning
One interesting application of the proposed loss function is its application to the ﬁeld of transfer
learning [16]. Knowledge from models trained on a speciﬁc task are applied to an entirely different
2We recognize ˆSi and CE are not guaranteed to be between zero and one. In our experiments however, we
ﬁnd that the cross entropy term in equation 1 and regularization term in equation 4 are between zero and one
when each term is divided by the number of classes |C|.
domain. Some recent developments [22, 15, 38, 10, 45], and several surveys [20, 46] can provide
further detail.
We demonstrate how the proposed loss can be used in the context of transfer learning to improve
classiﬁcation performance. For this experiment, we use MobilenetV2 [30] on the cats and dogs
dataset [9], found in Tensorﬂow [1]. The task is to classify whether an image contains a cat or dog,
using the knowledge learned from the ImageNet dataset. We place one convolutional layer after the
last convolutional layer in the MobilenetV2 network, closest to the softmax layer. This additional
convolutional layer consists of 256 ﬁlters, using a 1 × 1 kernel with a stride of 1. We then remove all
layers after, and add a softmax layer. All other layer weights are frozen. The baseline model uses
the cross entropy loss given by equation 1. We compare this against two trustworthy CNN models
trained using equation 7. The ﬁrst uses Grad-CAM to generate saliency maps during training, the
second uses Guided Grad-CAM. We train all models for 50 epochs using a batch size of 32. We
compare post hoc saliency maps using the structured similarity index (SSIM) given by equation 11,
to compare relative to the baseline model. We ﬁx the learning rate to .01 and set λ = .9.
SSIM(x, y) =
(2µxµy + c1)(2σxy + c2)
(µ2x + µ2y + c1)(σ2x + σ2y + c2)
(11)
Where c1 = (0.01L)2 and c2 = (0.03L)2, and L is deﬁned by the dynamic range of the pixel values.
4.2
VGG-16 on ImageNet
As a second experiment, we apply our loss function to VGG-16 [36], trained on the ImageNet
dataset [29] for an image classiﬁcation task. Again we train two trustworthy models, one using Grad-
CAM to generate saliency maps during training, the other using Guided Grad-CAM. We demonstrate
improved post hoc saliency maps as evaluated by users, and improved classiﬁcation performance.
We compare this to a VGG-16 baseline trained using only the cross entropy loss. We use a subset
of 30, 000 images, and update the parameters of VGG-16 from the block5_conv3 layer. This layer
was chosen as it is the closest convolutional layer to the softmax layer. We freeze the weights of all
other layers. We compare classiﬁcation performance of all models using accuracy, precision, and
recall. We train different models varying the learning rate and lambda λ. We perform a grid search
for the learning rate and lambda hyperparameters. We consider learning rates ∈{.01, .1, .3}, and
λ ∈{.9, .7, .5}. Post hoc saliency maps are evaluated with a user experiment, detailed below.
4.2.1
User Experiment
To compare the post hoc saliency maps across models, a scoring metric is needed. Two commonly
used metrics are localization error [31], or the pointing game [31, 43]. Both methods require ground
truth object labels. We do not assume the data has any object annotations, hence these metrics cannot
be used.
To score the post hoc saliency maps between the trustworthy gradient penalized models and their
respective baselines, we conduct a user experiment. We take the best performing set of hyperparam-
eters (learning rate of .01, and λ = .9), and use all models in the experiment to generate saliency
maps for user evaluation.
We randomly sample test set images for user evaluation. We show users the input image and a post
hoc saliency map from each model. We ask 29 users "Which image best highlights the <true_class>
in the original image." Users were given the option of "Can’t distinguish" and "They look the same"
in the case that no saliency maps are convincing. Users are asked if they have a Bachelor’s degree
in Computer Science, if they are familiar with the term saliency map used by the machine learning
community, and if they have experience in computer vision. A link to the experiment can be found
below. 3
3https://forms.gle/DMszuv84sbxB9tzt7
Table 1: Classiﬁcation Performance-MobilenetV2
Model
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
MobilenetV2 Baseline
97.6%
97.6%
97.6%
98.4%
98.4%
98.4%
Trustworthy CNN w/ Grad-CAM (R1 = 0)
98.3%
98.3%
98.3%
Trustworthy CNN w/ Grad-CAM (R2 = 0)
98.5%
98.5%
98.5%
98.7%
98.7%
98.7%
Trustworthy CNN w/ Guided Grad-CAM (R1 = 0)
98.6%
98.6%
98.6%
Trustworthy CNN w/ Guided Grad-CAM (R2 = 0)
98.4%
98.4%
98.4%
Classiﬁcation performance on transfer learning task. R1 = 0 denotes models trained with equation 5
set to zero, R2 = 0 denotes models trained with equation 6.
Table 2: Classiﬁcation Performance-VGG16
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
VGG-16 Baseline
66% (56%,75%)
49.7%
50.8%
70% (61%, 78%)
54.6%
55.7%
VGG-16 Baseline
66% (56%,75%)
49.7%
50.8%
70% (61%, 78%)
54.6%
55.7%
Classiﬁcation performance shown for gradient penalized trustworthy models and baselines on test set
images shown during user experiment. A 95% conﬁdence interval (lower, upper) is also included.
Results
5.1
Transfer Learning
The classiﬁcation performance for all models can be found in Table 1. We observe the trustworthy
MobilenetV2 model trained using Guided Grad-CAM outperformed the baseline and trustworthy
Grad-CAM model. We ﬁnd that both trustworthy CNN models outperformed their respective baseline
models trained with just the cross entropy term.
The SSIM between saliency maps of the baseline model and trustworthy CNN trained with Grad-
CAM was .78, and .64 between the baseline and trustworthy CNN trained with Guided Grad-CAM.
When R1 = 0, the SSIM for the trustworthy Grad-CAM and Guided Grad-CAM models drop to .76,
and .5 respectively. When R2 = 0, the SSIM for the trustworthy Grad-CAM and Guided Grad-CAM
models increases to .85, and .94 respectively. This metric shows the post hoc saliency maps differ
visually from the baseline, however, it fails to identify which saliency maps are more visually correct.
5.2
VGG-16 on ImageNet
Table 2 shows the accuracy, precision, and recall of all models on the subset of test set images shown
to users in the experiment. We use the best performing set of hyperparameters to be evaluated by the
users. We ﬁnd that both trustworthy models outperform their respective baselines. We recognize the
classiﬁcation performance between the trustworthy models to be equal, likely due to setting λ = .9.
5.2.1
User Experiment
We ﬁnd the SSIM between the baseline VGG-16 and trustworthy Grad-CAM model was 99.8, and
99.4 between the baseline VGG-16 and trustworthy Guided Grad-CAM model. According to this
metric, the saliency maps generated by the gradient penalized models should be very similar to the
base model. Through our user experiment however, we ﬁnd this not to be the case. This is further
discussed in Section 6.
Table 3 further breaks down the user experiment, showing the percentage of images that fall into each
case. Users decided both trustworthy models outperform the baseline in all scenarios, except case 2.
Recall case 2 occurs when the predicted label is incorrect and the saliency map is accurate. Ideally
images fall into case 1, and fewer images fall into cases 2, 3, and 4.
Table 3: User Experiment Breakdown-VGG16
Case 1
Case 2
VGG-16 Baseline
18% (7%,28%)
16% (6%, 26%)
44% (30%, 58%)
16% (6%, 26%)
VGG-16 Baseline
16% (6%, 26%)
10% (2%,18%)
50% (36%, 64%)
18% (7%, 29%)
Case 3
Case 4
VGG-16 Baseline
44% (30%, 58%)
16% (6%, 26%)
22% (10%, 33%)
12% (3%, 21%)
VGG-16 Baseline
48% (34%, 62%)
20% (9%,31%)
18% (7%, 29%)
8% (0%, 20%)
For the Trustworthy CNN trained with Grad-CAM, 44% of images shown to users were found to have
accurate predictions, and more accurate saliency maps (relative to the baseline). A 95% conﬁdence
interval (lower, upper) is included. Recall Case 1: % of observations with predicted labels correct
and resulting saliency maps accurate. Case 2: % of observations with predicted labels incorrect
and resulting saliency maps accurate. Case 3: % of observations with predicted labels correct and
resulting saliency maps inaccurate. Case 4 % of observations with predicted labels incorrect and
resulting saliency maps inaccurate. High percentage is desirable for Case 1, low percentage is
desirable for Cases 2, 3, and 4.
5.3
Discussion
We ﬁnd the trustworthy models trained with Guided Grad-CAM outperform all other models in terms
of predicting correct labels and accurate post hoc saliency maps. In the transfer learning experiment,
we ﬁnd the SSIM decreases on gradient penalized models when equation 5 is set to zero. Additionally,
the SSIM increases when equation 6 is set to zero. This shows the inherent trade-off between the two
terms.
On the ImageNet dataset, users found the baseline VGG-16 models to produce inaccurate saliency
maps. These models are not trustworthy. The most common error from the baseline models was
producing accurate predictions with inaccurate saliency maps (case 3 from Table 3). This is not
surprising considering the cross entropy loss is saliency map unaware. Users will question the
legitimacy of the model when inaccurate saliency maps are produced. Our approach offers improved
classiﬁation results and more accurate saliency maps, resulting in increased user trust.
Limitations
6.1
Loss Function
One noticeable limitation using the proposed loss is that only one convolutional layer can be updated
at a time in training. This is partially due to the limitations of some saliency methods. Grad-CAM
and Guided Grad-CAM [31] for example generate saliency maps using the gradients from a speciﬁc
layer only. Hence the gradients of one individual layer are used to compute the saliency map. This
layer however may not fully represent what the entire model has learned.
6.2
Saliency Map Scoring
One difﬁculty in scoring saliency maps is that two saliency maps can correctly highlight the object of
interest, but equal attribution values can be assigned to different parts of the same object. An example
of this can be demonstrated in Figure 3 using two hypothetical models.
(a) Input Image
(b) Hypothetical Model 1 (c) Hypothetical Model 2
Figure 3: Two saliency maps with equal attribution values
For some input image, both models output saliency maps with equal total attribution values, but
pixels are attributed to different locations on the object. The model in Figure 3b attributes the face of
the Marmot, and the model in Figure 3c attributes a portion of the face and body. These two saliency
maps have exactly the same total attribution values when averaged. Hence, the SSIM between
Figures 3b and 3c is 99.9, but look signiﬁcantly different. It is unclear which saliency map is more
visually accurate.
Conclusion
In this work, we combine the use of post hoc interpretability methods with traditional loss functions
to learn trustworthy model parameters. We propose a loss function that penalizes inaccurate saliency
maps during training. Further constraining the loss function used by convolutional neural networks
increases classiﬁcation performance, and users found the post hoc saliency maps to be more accurate.
This give a more dependable model. Future work involves extending this method to other tasks
(image captioning, object tracking, etc), and other deep learning architectures.
Broader Impact
Users receiving an automated decision from a convolutional neural network will beneﬁt from this
research; Our approach provides a way to increase user trust in models previously treated as black
box.
Using this approach, parameters of a pre-trained model can be updated, or parameters of a new layer
can be learned in a transfer learning framework. Errors from an existing model can be identiﬁed and
ﬁxed. For practitioners wanting to eliminate a race or gender bias from a model, they will not have to
retrain the model from scratch. This will save electricity used by the machine(s) to train.
We do not believe anyone is put at a disadvantage from this research. A failure of this system would
mean the model would no longer be convincing to users, and thus no different than the original black
box model.