CAMERAS: Enhanced Resolution And Sanity preserving Class Activation
Mapping for image saliency
Mohammad A. A. K. Jalwana
Naveed Akhtar
Mohammed Bennamoun
Ajmal Mian
Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia.
{mohammad.jalwana@research., naveed.akhtar@, mohammed.bennamoun@, ajmal.mian@}uwa.edu.au
Code:
https://github.com/VisMIL/CAMERAS
Abstract
Backpropagation image saliency aims at explaining
model predictions by estimating model-centric impor-
tance of individual pixels in the input.
However, class-
insensitivity of the earlier layers in a network only allows
saliency computation with low resolution activation maps of
the deeper layers, resulting in compromised image saliency.
Remedifying this can lead to sanity failures. We propose
CAMERAS, a technique to compute high-ﬁdelity backprop-
agation saliency maps without requiring any external priors
and preserving the map sanity. Our method systematically
performs multi-scale accumulation and fusion of the acti-
vation maps and backpropagated gradients to compute pre-
cise saliency maps. From accurate image saliency to artic-
ulation of relative importance of input features for different
models, and precise discrimination between model percep-
tion of visually similar objects, our high-resolution map-
ping offers multiple novel insights into the black-box deep
visual models, which are presented in the paper. We also
demonstrate the utility of our saliency maps in adversarial
setup by drastically reducing the norm of attack signals by
focusing them on the precise regions identiﬁed by our maps.
Our method also inspires new evaluation metrics and a san-
ity check for this developing research direction.
1. Introduction
Deep visual models are fast surpassing human-level per-
formance for various vision tasks, including image classiﬁ-
cation [15], [28], object detection [22], [23], and semantic
segmentation [17], [5]. However, they hardly offer any ex-
planation of their decisions, and are rightfully considered
black-boxes. This is problematic for their practical deploy-
ment, especially in high-risk emerging applications where
transparency is vital, e.g. in healthcare, self-driving vehicles
and smart surveillance [21]. The problem is exacerbated
by the push of ‘right to explanation’ by algorithmic regula-
tory authorities and their objection to black-box models in
safety-critical applications [1].
Addressing this issue for deep visual models, tech-
niques are emerging to offer input-agnostic [11] and input-
speciﬁc [8], [21], [25] explanation of model predictions.
This work subscribes to the latter, where the ultimate goal
is to identify the contribution of each pixel in an input to
the output prediction. The popular techniques to achieve
this adopt one of two strategies. The ﬁrst, systematically
modiﬁes the input image pixels (i.e. image regions) and an-
alyzes the effects of those perturbations on the output pre-
dictions [8], [9], [20], [33]. The underlying search nature
of this perturbation-based formulation offers high-ﬁdelity
model-centric importance attribution to the input pixels, al-
beit at a high computational cost.
Hence, tractability is
achieved under heuristics or external priors over the com-
puted importance maps.
This is undesired because the
eventual maps may be inﬂuenced by these external factors,
which compromises the model-ﬁdelity of the maps.
The second strategy relies on the activation maps of the
internal layers and gradients of the models.
Commonly
known as backpropagation saliency methods [25], [21],
[27], [30], [33], [34] approaches adopting this strategy are
computationally efﬁcient, thereby offering the possibility
of avoiding unnecessary heuristics or priors. However, for
the visual neural models, the layers closer to the input are
class-insensitive [21]. This limits the ammunition of back-
propagation saliency methods to the deeper layers of the
networks, where the size of activation maps is very small,
e.g. 10−3× of the input size. Projecting the saliency com-
puted with those maps onto the original image grid results
in intrinsically low-resolution image saliency. On the other
hand, using heuristics or priors to sharpen those projections
inadvertently compromise the sanity of the maps [2]. Not to
mention, employing activation signals of multiple internal
layers for resolution enhancement takes us back to a combi-
natorial search problem of choosing the best layers, under a
pre-speciﬁed heuristic.
Addressing the above issues, we introduce CAMERAS
- an Enhanced Resolution And Sanity preserving Class
Activation Mapping for backpropagation image saliency.
arXiv:2106.10649v1 [cs.CV] 20 Jun 2021
Figure 1. (Top) CAMERAS meticulously fuses activation maps and backpropagated gradients of a layer for multi-scale copies of an input.
After passing the resulting saliency map through ReLU and normalising it (f), the map is embedded on the original image. (Bottom) By
avoiding inﬂuence of external factors, CAMERAS easily passes the sanity checks for image saliency. Shown are the results of cascading
randomization [2] on ResNet. Progressive randomising of layer weights randomises the output right from the logits layer which identiﬁes
preservation of sanity. Thus, the CAMERAS maps do not sacriﬁce their sanity for high-resolution, achieving the best of both worlds.
The proposed technique (Fig. 1-top) systematically accu-
mulates and fuses multi-scale activation maps and back-
propagated gradients of a model to construct precise
saliency maps.
By avoiding the inﬂuence of any exter-
nal factor, e.g. heuristics, priors, thresholds, the saliency
maps of CAMERAS easily pass the sanity checks for im-
age saliency (Fig. 1-bottom). Moreover, the technique al-
lows saliency estimation with a single network layer, not
requiring any layer search for map resolution enhancement.
Contributions of the paper are summarised below:
• We propose CAMERAS for precise backpropagation
image saliency while preserving the sanity.
Our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art saliency meth-
ods by a large margin, achieving up to 27.5% error re-
duction for the popular pointing game metric [34].
• Exploring the newly found precision saliency map-
ping with CAMERAS, we visualise differences in the
semantic understanding of different architectures that
govern their performance. We also highlight model-
centric discrimination of input features for visually
similar objects in never-before-seen details.
• Considering the equivalent treatment of deep mod-
els as differentiable programs by the fast-developing
parallel ﬁeld of adversarial learning, we enhance
the widely considered strongest adversarial attack
PGD [18] with our saliency technique - drastically im-
proving the efﬁcacy of the attack.
• The ability of precise saliency computation allowed by
CAMERAS calls for new quantitative metrics and san-
ity checks. We contribute two new evaluation metrics
and a sanity check to advance this research direction.
2. Related work
The literature has seen multiple techniques that perturb
input pixels and measure its effects on the model outputs
to identify salient regions in input images [9], [8], [20].
Perturbing every possible combination of pixels has an ex-
ponential complexity.
Therefore, such techniques often
rely on ﬁxed subsets of pixel combinations for tractabil-
ity. Moreover, high non-linearity of deep models further
restricts the saliency map to be reliable under ﬁxed de-
vised perturbation subsets. RISE [20] and Occlusion [33]
generate attribution maps by weighing perturbation masks
corresponding to the changes in the output scores. Other
techniques, such as Meaningful perturbations [9], Extremal
perturbations [8], Real-time saliency [6] and [24] cast the
problem into an optimization objective. Though effective,
these methods face a common issue of allowing a channel
for external inﬂuence on the resulting maps in the form of
e.g. heuristics, external constraints, priors or threshold etc.
Backpropagation saliency methods [27], [25], [33] aim
at extracting information from within the model to identify
model-centric salient regions in an input image. Relying
on layer activations and model gradients, these methods are
also known to be computationally more effective [36], [12].
Simoyan et al. [27] ﬁrst used model gradients as a possi-
ble explanation of output predictions. Different adaptations
have since been proposed to mitigate the inherent noise sen-
sitivity of model gradients.
Guided back prop [30] and
DeConvNet [33] alter the backpropagation rules of model
ReLU layers, while SmoothGrad [29] computes the aver-
age gradients over samples in the close vicinity of the origi-
nal one. Similarly, DeepLIFT [26], LRP [4] and Excitation
Backprop [34] recast the backpropagation rules such that
the sum of attribution signal becomes unity. Sundararajan et
al. [31] interpolated multiple attribution maps to reduce the
signal noise. There are also instances of exploring saliency
computation using various layers of deep models by merg-
ing the layer activation maps with the gradient information.
Such methods include CAM [35], its generalized adaption
GradCAM [25], linear approximation [14] and NormGrad
[21]. For such methods, it is found that the layers closer to
output generate better saliency maps because those layers
are more sensitive to the high level class features.
Beyond the visual quality of saliency maps, a few works
have also critically explored the reliability of these maps for
different methods [19], [13]. Adebayo et al. [2] ﬁrst intro-
duced sanity checks for image saliency methods, highlight-
ing that visual appeal of the maps alone can be misleading.
They evaluated sensitivity of the results of popular tech-
niques to model parameters. Surprisingly, ‘model-centric
saliency maps’ computed by multiple methods were found
insensitive to the model - failing the sanity check. The tech-
niques avoiding external inﬂuences on the map, e.g. Grad-
CAM [25] easily passed the test. This ﬁnding also resonated
with other subsequent sanity checks [21].
Evaluation of image saliency methods is a challenging
problem because deep model representation is not always
aligned with the human visual system [32]. Hence, indi-
rect evaluation of image saliency is often done by analysing
its weak localization performance. For instance, Pointing
game score [34] is a commonly used metric for quantitative
evaluation of image saliency results [8], [21]. It measures
the correlation between the maximal point in a saliency map
with the semantic labels of the pixel. Its later adaptation [9]
measures the overlap in the bounding boxes from saliency
maps and the ground truth. Petsiuk et al. [20] proposed
insertion-deletion metrics to measure the impact of pertur-
bations over image patches in the order of importance to
quantify saliency accuracy. Nevertheless, these metrics are
meant to be weak indicators of saliency maps due to the im-
precise nature of the maps computed by the earlier methods,
which is no longer the case for CAMERAS.
3. Proposed Approach
Before discussing the details of our technique, we ﬁrst
provide a closer look at the broader paradigm of backprop-
agation saliency computation. We use Grad-CAM [25] - a
popular technique - as a test case to motivate the proposed
method. The text below highlights only the relevant aspects
of the test case for intuition.
3.1. Saliency computation with backpropagation
Let I ∈Rc×h×w be an input image with ‘c’ channels.
A deep visual classiﬁer K(I) maps I to a prediction vector
yℓ∈RL, where ‘L’ is the total number of classes. Here, ‘ℓ’
indicates the predicted label of I under the premise that the
ℓth coefﬁcient of y has the largest value. It is well-known
that a neural network is a hierarchical composition of rep-
resentation layers.
Rebufﬁet al. [21] demonstrated that
among these layers, those closer to the input learn class-
insensitive features.
Thus, the deeper layers hold more
promise for computing image saliency for a model. Grad-
CAM [25] takes a pragmatic approach to single out the last
convolutional layer to estimate the saliency map.
Let us denote the kth activation map of the last convo-
lutional layer of a network as Ak(I) ∈Rm×n. Focusing
on Grad-CAM, the technique ﬁrst computes an intermedi-
ate representation S(I) ∈Rm×n, such that S(i,j)(I) =
k wkA(i,j)
(I), where wk is given by Eq. (1). Henceforth,
we ignore the argument (I) for clarity, unless required.
wk =
(m + n)
i=1
j=1
∂yℓ
∂A(i,j)
(1)
In the above expressions, X(i,j) is the (i, j) coefﬁcient of
X. The computed S is later extended to the ﬁnal saliency
map Ψ ∈Rh×w, as f(S) : S →Ψ, where the function
f(.) must account for interpolating an m × n matrix for a
h × w grid (along other complementary transformations).
3.2. Sub-optimality of backpropagation methods
Observing Grad-CAM (and similar methods) from the
above perspective reveals two performance drain-holes in
backpropagation image saliency computations.
(a) Over-simpliﬁcation of the weights wk: Since Ak is an
activation map, individual coefﬁcients of this matrix should
have different importance for the ﬁnal prediction. Indeed,
this is also reﬂected in the values of individual backpropa-
gated gradients for these coefﬁcients - computed with the
expression in the parenthesis in Eq. (1).
Since the ul-
timate objective of image saliency is to compute impor-
tance of individual pixels, loosing information with over-
simpliﬁcation of wk is not conducive. Grad-CAM takes an
extreme approach of representing wk with a scalar value.
The main reason for that is, it is actually detrimental to
plainly replace wk with an encoding W k ∈Rm×n such that
S = P
k W k ⊙Ak. Here, ⊙is the point-wise product and
W k encodes individual backpropagated gradients. Gradi-
ents are extremely sensitive to signal variations.
Hence,
even a small activation change can result in (a mislead-
ing) exaggerated weight alteration for the activation map,
resulting in incorrect image saliency. Grad-CAM is able to
mitigate this problem by averaging the gradients in Eq. (1).
However, this remedy comes at the cost of loosing the ﬁne-
grained information about the gradients.
Though centered around Grad-CAM, the above discus-
sion points to a simple, yet powerful generic notion for ef-
fective backpropagation saliency computation. That is, to
better leverage the backpropagated gradients, the differen-
tial information of the gradients (in W k) is still at our dis-
posal to exploit. Fusing activation maps with this informa-
tion promises more precise image saliency.
(b) Large interpolated segments: Typically, the activation
maps of the deeper convolutional layer in visual classiﬁers
are (spatially) much smaller than the input images. For in-
stance, in ResNet [10], the 7 × 7 maps of the last convo-
lutional layer are 1024 times smaller than the 224 × 224
inputs. Thus, for m ≪h and n ≪w, a saliency map
Ψ computed with the class sensitive deeper layers must be
mainly composed of interpolated segments. To contextual-
ize, in the above ResNet example, 99.9% of the values are
generated by the function f(S) : S →Ψ in Grad-CAM.
This automatically renders Ψ a low-resolution map, leaving
alone the issue of correctness of the importance assigned
to the individual pixels in the eventual saliency map. The
low resolution of saliency maps has also spawned methods
to improve f(.) [2], [25]. However, those techniques in-
evitably rely on external information (including heuristics)
for the transform S →Ψ due to unavailability of further
useful information from the model itself. This leads to san-
ity check failures because the operands are no longer purely
grounded in the original model.
3.3. The room for improvement
From the above discussion, it is clear that whereas use-
ful techniques exist for backpropagation image saliency, the
paradigm is yet to fully harness the backpropagated gradi-
ents and resolution enhancement of the activation maps for
precise image saliency. Both limitations are rooted in the
very nature of the underlying signals. Leveraging these sig-
nals from multiple layers can potentially help in partially
overcoming the issues.
However, this possibility is also
restricted by the class-insensitivity of the earlier network
layers and combinatorial nature of the problem. Moreover,
there is evidence that multi-layer fusion can often adversely
affect image saliency [21]. Hence, a technique speciﬁcally
targeting the class-sensitive last layer, while allowing min-
imal loss of differential information across backpropagated
gradients and improving activation map upsampling, holds
signiﬁcant promises for better saliency computation.
3.4. CAMERAS
Building directly on the insights in § 3.3, we devise
CAMERAS - an enhanced resolution and sanity preserv-
ing class activation mapping scheme. The approach is il-
lustrated in Fig. (1-top) and explained below in a top-down
manner, keeping the ﬂow of the above discussion.
Our method eventually computes a saliency map as:
Ψ = f
ReLU
  X
Wk ⊙
, ∀k,
(2)
where
Wk ∈Rh×w encodes the differential information
of the backpropagated gradients for the kth activation map
in a network layer,
Ak ∈Rh×w is an enhanced resolution
encoding for the activation map itself, and f(.) performs an
element-wise normalisation in the range [0, 1]. The
Wk and
Ak are deﬁned as follows
Wk = E
 W k(ϕt(I, ζt)), ζo
(3)
Ak = E
 Ak(ϕt(I, ζt)), ζo
where ϕt(X, ζt) is the tth up-sampling applied to resize X
to the dimensions ζt - provided as a tuple. We ﬁx ζo =
(h, w) for I ∈Rc×h×w. This will be explained shortly. We
compute the (i, j) coefﬁcient of W k as
∂yℓ
∂A(i,j)
. The
overall process of generating an image saliency map with
CAMERAS is summarized as Algorithm 1.
The algorithm computes the desired saliency map Ψ by
an iterative multi-scale accumulation of activation maps and
gradients for the κth layer of the model. In the tth iteration,
the input image I gets up-sampled to ζt based on the max-
imum desired size ζm and the number of steps N allowed
to reach that size (lines 4,5). Provided that the input up-
scaling does not alter the model prediction, the activation
maps and backpropagated gradients to the κth layer are also
up-sampled and stored. We show this on lines 6-10 of the al-
gorithm. Notice that, we use calligraphic symbols to distin-
guish 3D tensors from matrices (e.g. A instead of A for ac-
tivations) in the algorithm for clarity. The newly introduced
symbol ∇J (κ, ℓ) on line 9 denotes the collective backprop-
agated gradients to the κth layer w.r.t. the predicted label
ℓ. Also notice, on lines 8, 9, up-sampling of the activa-
tion maps and gradients are performed to match the original
image size ζo. This is because, the same accumulated sig-
nals are eventually transformed into the saliency map of the
original image. We iteratively accumulate the up-sampled
activation maps and gradients, and ﬁnally compute their av-
erages on lines 12 and 13. On line 14, we compute the
saliency map by solving Eq. (2). Here, matrix notation is
intentionally used to match the original equation.
Algorithm 1 CAMERAS algorithm
Input: Classiﬁer K, image I ∈Rc×h×w, maximum size
ζm, steps N, interpolation function ϕ(.), layer κ
Output: Image saliency map Ψ ∈Rh×w
1: Initialize Ao, Wo to 0 tensors, ζo = (h, w) and t =
tm = 0, ℓ= K(I)
2: while t ≤N do
t ←t + 1
ζt ←ζt−1 + ⌊ζm
N ⌋(t −1)
It ←ϕt(I, ζt)
if K(It) →ℓthen
tm ←tm + 1
At ←At−1 + ϕt
 A(It, κ), ζo
Wt ←Wt−1 + ϕt
 ∇J (κ, ℓ), ζo
10:
end if
11: end while
12:
A ←At/tm
13:
W ←Wt/tm
14: Ψ = f
ReLU(P
Wk ⊙
Ak)
, ∀k
15: return
In Algorithm 1, CAMERAS is shown to expect four
input parameters, along with the classiﬁer and the image.
We discuss the choice of ϕ(.) in § 3.4.1 where we even-
tually propose to keep this function ﬁxed. The algorithm
optionally allows κ for computing saliency maps using lay-
ers other than the last convolutional layer of the model. For
all the experiments presented in the main paper, we keep κ
ﬁxed to the last convolutional layer. This is due to the well-
known class-sensitivity of the deeper layers of CNNs [21].
Essentially, the only choice to be made is for the values of
parameters ζm and N, which are related as ζm = cNζo,
where c is the step size. Trading-off performance with ef-
ﬁciency, the choice of these parameters is mainly governed
by the available computational resources. For larger ζm and
N values, performance of CAMERAS roughly improves
monotonically - generally saturating at ζm ≈(1K, 1K) for
ζo = (224, 224) for the popular ImageNet models. For
this ζm range, the performance is largely insensitive for
N ∈[5, 10]. We give further analysis of parameter values in
the supplementary material. In the presented experiments,
we empirically choose ζm = (1K, 1K) and N = 7.
3.4.1
Sanity preservation and strength
In CAMERAS, we do not impose any prior over the
saliency map, nor we use any heuristic to guide its com-
putation process. The technique also preserves model ﬁ-
delity by requiring no structural (or any other) alteration
to the original model. It mainly relies on primitive arith-
metic operations over the model signals. These attributes
also characterize those other methods that pass the popular
sanity checks for backpropagation saliency [2], [21], albeit
resulting in low-resolution saliency maps. In CAMERAS,
the only source of any ‘potential’ external inﬂuence on the
resulting map is through the interpolation function ϕ(.). We
conjecture that as long as ϕ(.) is a ﬁrst-order function de-
ﬁned over the signals originating in the model itself, CAM-
ERAS maps will always preserve their sanity because the
maps would fully originate in the model. To preclude any
unintentional prior over the maps, our formulation dictates
the use of simpler functions as ϕ(.). Hence, we choose to
ﬁx bi-linear interpolation as ϕ(.).
To analyse the reasons of extraordinary performance of
CAMERAS (see § 4), we provide a brief theoretical per-
spective on the accumulation of multi-scale interpolated
signals exploited by our method, using the results below.
Lemma 3.1: For
X ∈Rh×w and its interpolated approx-
imation f
X = ϕ(X) s.t. X ∈Rm×n and
X̸ = f
X −f
X|| = f ((h −m), (w −n)) for m < h and n < w,
where ϕ(.) denotes bi-linear interpolation and f(.) is a
monotonic function over its arguments.
Lemma 3.2: For f
Xz = ϕ(Xz), where Xz ∈Rm×n and
Xp = ϕ(Xp), where Xp ∈Rp×q s.t. p < m and n < q,
X −f
Xz|| −||
X −f
Xp|| ≤0.
Corollary: E
z [||
X −f
Xz||] ≤||
X −f
Xp||, ∀f
Xz ∪f
Xp.
The lemma 3.1 states that bi-linear interpolation tends to be
more accurate when the difference in the dimensions of the
source signal and the target grid is smaller. The lemma 3.2
can also be easily veriﬁed as f
Xz is at least as accurate a
projection of
X as f
Xp, according to lemma 3.1. This nec-
essarily makes its error equal to or smaller than the error
of f
Xp. In the light of lemma 3.2, the corollary afﬁrms that
the expected error of a set of interpolated signals is upper-
bounded by the error of the least accurate signal in the set.
The above analysis highlights an important aspect. The
CAMERAS results will necessarily be as accurate as op-
erating our algorithm on the original input size, and will
improve monotonically thereof with the up-sampled inputs.
This is because the activations and gradients of the up-
sampled inputs would map more accurately on the original
image grid, as per the above results. This is signiﬁcant be-
cause it allows CAMERAS to use the differential informa-
tion in the backpropagated gradient maps while accounting
for the noise-sensitivity of the gradients by averaging out
these signals across multiple scales. This is the key strength
of the proposed technique.
4. Evaluation
We perform a thorough qualitative and quantitative eval-
uation of CAMERAS on large-scale models and compare
the performance with the state-of-the-art methods.
Figure 2. Visual comparison of saliency maps with the state-of-the-art methods. Representative maps are shown for random class images
for ResNet-50, DenseNet-121 and Inception-v3. Class labels are provided at the top. Results of proposed CAMERAS are in yellow box.
4.1. Qualitative results
In Fig. 2, we qualitatively compare the results of our
technique with the existing saliency methods for ImageNet
models of ResNet, DenseNet and Inception. Representa-
tive maps of randomly chosen images are provided. See
the supplementary material for more visualisations. The
high quality of CAMERAS maps is apparent in the ﬁg-
ure. A quick inspection reveals that our technique main-
tains its performance across a variety of scenarios, includ-
ing clear objects (Loudspeaker, Mountain tent), occluded
objects (Bulbul), and multiples instances of objects (Accor-
dion, Basket). Observing carefully, CAMERAS maps pro-
vide precise maps even for small and relatively complex ge-
ometric shapes, e.g. Volleyball, Spotlight, Loafer, Hognose
snake. Interestingly, our method is able to attach appropri-
ate importance even to the reﬂection of the Hognose snake.
Adoption of saliency maps to complex geometric shapes is
a direct consequence of enabling precise saliency mapping
while sealing-off any external inﬂuence on the maps. CAM-
ERAS is able to maintain its characteristic precision across
different models and images. These are highly promising
results for explainability of modern deep visual classiﬁers.
4.2. Quantitative results
A quantum leap in performance with CAMERAS is also
observed in our quantitative results. Saliency maps are typ-
ically evaluated by measuring their correlation with the se-
mantic annotations of the image. Pointing game [34] is a
popular metric for that purpose, which considers the com-
puted saliency for every object class in the image. If the
maximal point in the saliency map is contained within the
object, it is considered a hit; otherwise, a miss. The perfor-
mance is measured as the percentage of successful hits. We
refer to [34] for more details on the metric. Table 1 bench-
marks the performance of CAMERAS for pointing game
on 4, 952 images of PASCAL VOC test set [7], and ∼50K
images of COCO 2014 validation set [16]. Our technique
consistently shows superior performance, achieving up to
27.5% error reduction. The gain is higher for ResNet as
compared to VGG due the better performance of the origi-
nal ResNet that permits better saliency.
The pointing game generally disregards precision of the
saliency maps by focusing only on the maximal points. Ar-
guably, crudeness of the saliency maps computed by the ear-
lier methods inﬂuenced this evaluation metric. The possibil-
ity of precise saliency computation (by CAMERAS) calls
for new metrics that account for the ﬁner details of saliency
maps.
We propose ‘positive map density’ and ‘negative
map density’ as two suitable metrics, respectively deﬁned
as: ρ+
map = P(K(I ⊙Ψ))/ P
j Ψ(i,j) × (h × w), and
map = P(K(I ⊙1−Ψ))/ P
j (1 −Ψ(i,j))×(h×w).
VOC07 Test (All/Diff)
COCO14 Val (All/Diff)
Method
VGG16
ResNet50
VGG16
ResNet50
Center [8]
69.6/42.4
69.6/42.4
27.8/19.5
27.8/19.5
Gradient [27]
76.3/56.9
72.3/56.8
37.7/31.4
35.0/29.4
DeConv. [33]
67.5/44.2
68.6/44.7
30.7/23.0
30.0/21.9
Guid [30]
75.9/53.0
77.2/59.4
39.1/31.4
42.1/35.3
MWP [34]
77.1/56.6
84.4/70.8
39.8/32.8
49.6/43.9
cMWP [34]
79.9/66.5
90.7/82.1
49.7/44.3
58.5/53.6
RISE∗[20]
86.9/75.1
86.4/78.8
50.8/45.3
54.7/50.0
GradCAM [25] 86.6/74.0
90.4/82.3
54.2/49.0
57.3/52.3
Extremal∗[8]
88.0/76.1
88.9/78.7
51.5/45.9
56.5/51.5
NormGrad [21] 81.9/64.8
84.6/72.2
CAMERAS
86.2/76.2
94.2/88.8
55.4/50.7
69.9/66.4
Table 1. Mean accuracy on pointing game over the full data (All)
splits and subset of difﬁcult images (Diff), as speciﬁed in [34]. The
results of other schemes are generated with TorchRay package [8],
and ‘*’ denotes an average over 3 runs for improved performance.
Positive map density (ρ+
map ↑)
Negative map density (ρ−
map ↓)
Model
NGrad
GCAM
Ours
NGrad
GCAM
Ours
ResNet
1.67
2.33
3.20
0.96
0.86
0.81
DenseNet
1.76
2.35
3.23
1.02
0.94
0.83
Inception
2.19
2.18
3.15
0.95
1.04
0.93
Table 2. The proposed metric scores on ImageNet validation set
for the saliency maps of Norm-Grad (NGrad) [21], Grad-CAM
(GCAM) [25], and our method.
Here, P(.) is the predicted probability of the actual label
of the object. Other notations follow the conventions from
above. For an estimated saliency map, the value of ρ+
map im-
proves if higher importance is attached to a smaller number
of pixels that retain higher conﬁdence of the model on the
original label. In the extreme case of all the pixels deemed
maximally important (saliency value 1), the score depicts
the model’s conﬁdence on the object label. On the other
hand, the value of ρ−
map decreases if lesser importance is at-
tached by the saliency method to more pixels that do not
inﬂuence the prediction conﬁdence on the original label.
Lower value of this metric is more desired.
Combined ρ+
map and ρ−
map provide a comprehensive quan-
tiﬁcation of the quality of the saliency map. We provide
results of our technique, Grad-CAM [25] and the recent
Norm-Grad [21] on our metrics in Table 2. Due to page
limits, we provide further discussion on the proposed met-
rics in the supplementary material.
5. CAMERAS for analysis
The precise CAMERAS results allow model analysis
with backpropagation saliency in unprecedented details.
Below, we present a few interesting examples.
The label attribution problem: It is known that deep
visual classiﬁers sometimes learn incorrect association of
labels with the objects in input images [9], [8].
For in-
stance, for the image of Chocolate Sauce in Fig. 3, Incep-
tion is found to associate the said label to spoon instead of
the sauce in the cup [9], [8]. This revelation was possi-
ble only through the input perturbation-based methods for
attribution due to their precise nature, however, only af-
ter ﬁne-tuning a list of parameters for the speciﬁc images.
Figure 3. Proposed CAMERAS allows veriﬁcation of label attribu-
tion even more precisely than the input perturbation-based meth-
ods. Meaningful [9] and Extremal [8] perturbation methods re-
quire image-speciﬁc ﬁne tuning of parameters. The latter is con-
ﬁned to 8% and 9% of the image area to achieve the results.
Figure 4. Precise saliency of CAMERAS reveals similarity in the
level of attention on ﬁne-grained features causes similarity in the
prediction conﬁdence (given as percentages) of different models.
CAMERAS is the ﬁrst backpropagation saliency method
to achieve this result, without requiring any image-speciﬁc
ﬁne tuning. Our method veriﬁes the original results of the
perturbation-based methods with an even better precision.
Prediction conﬁdence: In Fig. 4, CAMERAS results re-
veal that prediction conﬁdence on individual images is often
strongly inﬂuenced by a model’s attention on ﬁne-grained
features. Different visual models may pay similar attention
to the same features to achieve similar conﬁdence scores.
Discrimination of similar objects: Precise saliency map-
ping of CAMERAS also reveals clear differences of the
features learned by the models for visually similar objects.
In Fig. 5, we show the saliency maps for multiple exam-
ples of ‘Chain-link Fence’ and ‘Swing’ for two high per-
forming models. Notice how the models pay high atten-
tion to the individual chain knots (left) as compared to the
larger chain structures (right) to distinguish the two classes.
These results also reinforce the importance of ‘not enforc-
ing’ any priors on the map (e.g. smoothness [8]). The shown
results provide the ﬁrst instance of clear saliency differ-
ences between similar object features under backpropaga-
tion saliency mapping without external priors.
Figure 5. CAMERAS saliency maps reveal the differences of features learned by models to distinguish visually similar objects.
6. Adversarial Attack Enhancement
Similar to the backpropagation saliency methods, most
of the adversarial attacks on deep visual classiﬁers [3] treat
the models as differentiable programs. Using model gra-
dients, they engineer additive noise (i.e. perturbations) that
alter model predictions on an input. To avoid attack sus-
picion, the perturbations must be kept norm-bounded. Pro-
jected Gradient Descent (PGD) [18] is considered one of the
strongest attacks [3] that computes holistic perturbations to
fool the models. Using PGD as an example, we show that
precision saliency of CAMERAS can signiﬁcantly enhance
these attacks by conﬁning the perturbations to the regions
considered more salient by our method, see Fig. 6.
We iteratively solve for the following using the PGD
min
p (J (Ip, ℓll) + β ||p ⊙(1 −Ψ)||2) ,
(4)
where Ip is the perturbed image, J (.) is the cross en-
tropy loss, ℓll is the least likely label of the clean image,
p is the perturbation, and β = 50 is an empirically cho-
sen scaling factor. In (4), we allow the perturbation sig-
nal to grow freely for our salient regions while restricting it
in the other regions. By focusing only on the most impor-
tant regions, we are able to drastically reduce the required
perturbation norm. Maintaining 99.99% fooling conﬁdence
for ResNet-50 on all images of ImageNet validation set, we
successfully reduced the PGD perturbation norm by 56.5%
on average with our CAMERAS enhancement. See the sup-
plementary material for more details. Other adversarial at-
tacks can also be enhanced similarly with CAMERAS.
6.1. Sanity test with adversarial perturbation
Gradient-based adversarial attacks algorithmically com-
pute minimal perturbations to image pixels to maximally
change the model prediction. This objective coincides with
the objective of image saliency computation, thereby pro-
viding a natural sanity check for the saliency methods. That
is, the effects of corruption with an adversarial perturbation
to image pixels should correspond to the importance of the
pixels identiﬁed by the saliency method. Leveraging this
fact, we develop a sanity check for saliency methods that
operates on pixel-by-pixel basis, which is more suited for
precise image saliency. We provide details of the test in the
supplementary material due to page limits.
Figure 6. Enhancement of PGD with CAMERAS saliency. Con-
ﬁning the perturbation to high importance regions discovered by
CAMERAS drastically reduces visual perceptibility of the attack
while maintaining the fooling ratio and conﬁdence on the wrong
labels. For clarity, ℓ∞-norm of 12/255 is chosen for perturbation.
7. Conclusion
We introduced CAMERAS to compute precise saliency
maps using the gradient backpropagation strategy.
Our
technique is shown to preserve the sanity of the computed
saliency maps by avoiding external inﬂuence and priors
over the maps. High precision of our saliency maps allow
better explanation of deep visual model predictions. We
also demonstrated application of CAMERAS to enhance
adversarial attacks, and used this to introduce a new san-
ity check for high-ﬁdelity saliency methods.
Acknowledgment This research was supported by
ARC Discovery Grant DP190102443 and partially by
DP150100294 and DP150104251. The Titan V used in our
experiments was donated by NVIDIA corporation.