arXiv:2506.07327v3 [cs.CV] 15 Jun 2025
CASE: Contrastive Activation for Saliency
Estimation
Dane Williamson∗
University of Virginia
dw3zn@virginia.edu
Yangfeng Ji
University of Virginia
yj3fs@virginia.edu
Matthew Dwyer
University of Virginia
md3cn@virginia.edu
Abstract
Saliency methods are widely used to visualize which input features are deemed
relevant to a model’s prediction. However, their visual plausibility can obscure
critical limitations. In this work, we propose a diagnostic test for class sensitiv-
ity: a method’s ability to distinguish between competing class labels on the same
input. Through extensive experiments, we show that many widely used saliency
methods produce nearly identical explanations regardless of the class label, call-
ing into question their reliability. We find that class-insensitive behavior persists
across architectures and datasets, suggesting the failure mode is structural rather
than model-specific. Motivated by these findings, we introduce CASE, a con-
trastive explanation method that isolates features uniquely discriminative
for the predicted class. We evaluate CASE using the proposed diagnostic and a
perturbation-based fidelity test, and show that it produces faithful and more class-
specific explanations than existing methods.
Introduction
As deep learning systems become more widely deployed, explanation methods are increasingly
relied upon to justify, debug, and evaluate model predictions. Activation-based approaches such
as Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [Zhou et al., 2015] and Gradient-Weighted Class Activation
Mapping (Grad-CAM) [Selvaraju et al., 2016] are among the most widely used tools for interpreting
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). These methods aim to highlight features in the input that
are most relevant to a particular class prediction. However, despite their popularity, such saliency
methods often exhibit a critical failure mode: they produce nearly identical explanations for differ-
ent class labels on the same input. [Hooker et al., 2019, Jalwana et al., 2021]. This redundancy
undermines their utility in settings where distinguishing between predictions is essential, such as
auditing errors, understanding misclassifications, or building trust in model behavior. [Alqaraawi
et al., 2020, Lakkaraju et al., 2019, Lage et al., 2019, Mohseni et al., 2021, Tjoa and Guan, 2021]
This concern is echoed in human-centered studies such as HIVE [Kim et al., 2021], which show
that visual explanations can increase user trust even when the model is wrong, raising the risk that
visually plausible but semantically empty saliency maps may mislead stakeholders. They also ob-
serve that existing methods often produce indistinguishable explanations for correct and incorrect
predictions, suggesting a broader insensitivity to class label. In high-stakes applications, such as
diagnosis or safety monitoring, this insensitivity directly compromises the value of explanations as
a safeguard against error. Notably, real-world failures of saliency methods have been documented
in medical imaging, where models mistakenly rely on dataset artifacts, such as text tokens or posi-
tional cues, rather than pathology features, leading to clinically misleading saliency maps.
[Tjoa
and Guan, 2021].
∗Correspondence to: dw3zn@virginia.edu
Preprint.
Original Image
Class: Band Aid
Class: safety pin
(a) Band Aid vs Safety Pin
Original Image
Class: clog
Class: doormat
(b) Clog vs Doormat
Original Image
Class: daisy
Class: ant
(c) Daisy vs Ant
Original Image
Class: electric guitar
Class: stage
(d) Electric Guitar vs Stage
Figure 1:
Saliency maps for different class labels on the same image using Grad-CAM. Despite
switching the target class, the highlighted regions remain nearly identical, indicating a lack of class-
specificity. This supports our diagnostic findings in RQ1.
Motivated by these concerns, we focus on two essential properties that explanation methods should
satisfy in classification settings:
• Class-Specificity: Explanations should reflect features that are distinctive to the target
class. Saliency maps for semantically disjoint labels (e.g., airplane vs. barbell) should dif-
fer more than those for related ones (e.g., terrier vs. poodle). Bau et al. [2017] demonstrate
that CNN units can align with human-interpretable concepts, suggesting that class-specific
representations are both learnable and quantifiable.
• High Fidelity: Explanations should faithfully reflect the model’s internal reasoning.
This is best assessed through model-grounded metrics, such as confidence change after
perturbing salient features. [Samek et al., 2015, Petsiuk et al., 2018, Chang et al., 2018,
Yeh et al., 2019]
To illustrate this issue, Figure 1 compares saliency maps generated for the top-1 and top-2 predicted
class labels on the same input. Despite the class label change, methods such as Grad-CAM produce
nearly identical explanations, highlighting the same spatial regions. This visual similarity, even
between semantically distinct classes, suggests that many popular saliency methods fail to isolate
class-discriminative evidence.
We formalize this observation as a diagnostic test for class sensitivity. Specifically, we compute
the top-k feature overlap between saliency maps generated for different class labels on the same
input. A method that highlights the same regions regardless of label fails this test. We evaluate
this behavior using a one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test to assess whether the median agreement
exceeds a lenient threshold. This analysis serves as a model- and method-agnostic check of whether
a saliency method distinguishes among competing class hypotheses.
To address the limitation of class-insensitivity, we introduce CASE (Contrastive Activation for
Saliency Estimation), a contrastive extension of Grad-CAM designed to highlight features that are
uniquely discriminative for the target class. CASE compares neuron activations for the predicted
class against those of a contrast class, reducing shared attribution and improving class specificity.
Importantly, CASE requires no architectural modifications and operates on the internal activations
of the trained model.
We evaluate CASE alongside five popular saliency methods across four architectures and two
datasets. In our class-sensitivity diagnostic, CASE consistently produces lower top-k overlap be-
tween class labels than baseline methods. In a complementary fidelity test, we measure the drop in
model confidence after minimally perturbing the top-k salient features. CASE achieves competitive
confidence drop, indicating stronger alignment with decision-relevant evidence.
Contributions.
1. We introduce a diagnostic test for class sensitivity that quantifies top-k feature overlap
between saliency maps for different class labels on the same input. Applying this test to
five widely used saliency methods across four architectures and two datasets, we find that
most methods fail to distinguish between competing classes, even for semantically distinct
categories.
2. We
propose
CASE,
contrastive
saliency
method
that
isolates
uniquely
discriminative features by subtracting gradient components shared with fre-
quently confused classes. CASE consistently produces more class-specific saliency maps
and maintains strong attribution fidelity, outperforming baselines on class sensitivity and
matching them on faithfulness.
Related Work
2.1
Contrastive Explanations
A number of prior methods have explored contrastive reasoning to enhance interpretability.
CWOX [Xie et al., 2023] formulates explanation as a clustering problem over confusion sets, re-
quiring class-specific explanations to differ from those of their nearest neighbors in a latent tree.
While conceptually appealing, CWOX relies on HLTA-derived cluster structures and explicit con-
trast baselines, which may introduce brittleness or restrict applicability. [Chen et al., 2016]
Contrastive Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (C-LRP) [Gu et al., 2018] extends the LRP [Bach
et al., 2015] framework to compare class-specific relevance maps to those of reference classes.
However, C-LRP remains tied to backpropagation-based relevance signals and does not extend to
activation-based methods like CAM.
In contrast, our approach introduces a contrastive mechanism within the CAM framework, lever-
aging natural competition between class logits to isolate class-discriminative evidence. We avoid
the need for external baselines or learned structures, focusing instead on intrinsic class separability
within the model’s own prediction space.
2.2
Saliency Methods and Class Insensitivity
Grad-CAM [Selvaraju et al., 2016] and its variants (e.g., Grad-CAM++ [Chattopadhay et al., 2018],
AblationCAM [Desai and Ramaswamy, 2020], ScoreCAM [Wang et al., 2019], LayerCAM [Jiang
et al., 2021]) have become standard tools for visualizing model predictions. These methods produce
spatial heatmaps based on either gradient or activation weighting. However, several studies have
highlighted their limitations with respect to faithfulness and class sensitivity.
Adebayo et al. [2018] demonstrate that certain saliency methods are invariant to randomization of
model weights or labels, failing what they term ”sanity checks.”. Their work introduces the notion
of model-insensitivity, where attribution maps remain unchanged even as the model parameters are
randomized. While this critique reveals concerning invariance patterns, it targets variation across
models, not across class predictions within the same model.
In contrast, our work focuses on a different failure mode: class-insensitivity. We show that many
activation-based methods produce nearly identical saliency maps for different class labels2, suggest-
ing they fail to isolate discriminative evidence. This form of insensitivity undermines the explanatory
value of class-conditional attribution. While later variants of Grad-CAM improve visual smoothness
or localization, they do not resolve this overlap in class-specific evidence. Our method addresses
this by introducing a contrastive correction based on internal class competition, directly targeting
the class-indistinct attribution problem.
2.3
Discriminative Features and Exclusivity
Beyond attribution intensity, several works have investigated the exclusivity of features with respect
to class labels. Kalibhat et al. [2023] define discriminative features as those with positive gradient
contributions toward a class score:
Dc =
a ∈A
∂yc
∂a > 0
(1)
However, such features may overlap across classes, i.e., ∃c̸ = c′ : Dc ∩Dc′̸ = ∅, leading to
ambiguity. This reflects a fundamental limitation of gradient-based attribution: it reveals support,
but not necessarily specificity. Our work explicitly targets this gap, focusing on isolating features
that are not just correlated with the target class, but uniquely discriminative relative to plausible
alternatives.
2.4
Agreement Metrics and Evaluation of Saliency
Several metrics have been proposed to evaluate saliency maps based on consistency and selectivity.
Krishna et al. [Krishna et al., 2022] introduce the notion of the disagreement problem, observing that
saliency maps for different class labels often highlight overlapping regions. They propose overlap-
based metrics to assess class-separability in explanations. We adopt and extend this framework by
applying the Wilcoxon signed-rank test to determine whether saliency methods systematically fail
to distinguish between top-1 and top-2 predictions. This offers a statistical lens on class sensitivity
that complements visual inspection.
2.5
Summary
In summary, while prior work has surfaced critical limitations of saliency methods, such as insensi-
tivity to model or data [Adebayo et al., 2018], or failure to isolate class-specific features [Krishna
et al., 2022, Kalibhat et al., 2023], few methods provide both class-distinctiveness and architectural
compatibility. Our work addresses this gap by quantifying class overlap in existing methods and
2see Figure 1
Input
Image
Backprop
Conv
Layer
CASE
Saliency
Map
Layer
Output
Vector
Dung Beetle
Ground Beetle
Tiger Beetle
Averaging
Orthogonal Complement
Activations
Gradients
Figure 2: Overview of the CASE algorithm. Gradients are backpropagated for the target class (blue)
and contrast classes (red, green). The contrast gradients are averaged, and the target gradient is
projected onto this average. The projection is then subtracted from the original target gradient to
isolate a class-specific signal. The resulting orthogonal component is used to compute the weights
for the final saliency map.
introducing a contrastive refinement tailored to activation-based explanations. This yields clearer,
more class-sensitive visualizations and aligns explanatory focus with the model’s internal decision
boundaries.
Contrastive Activation for Saliency Estimation (CASE)
3.1
Overview
We introduce CASE (Contrastive Activation for Saliency Estimation), a gradient-based saliency
method designed to improve class-specificity by suppressing shared attribution between frequently
confused class labels. While existing saliency methods highlight features that contribute to a class
prediction, they often fail to distinguish between closely related classes, yielding nearly identical ex-
planations across labels. CASE addresses this by explicitly removing gradient components shared
with a contrast set, classes that the model confuses with the target, thereby isolating uniquely dis-
criminative evidence. The full procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1 and visualized in Figure 2.
3.2
Contrastive Gradients
Prior work has observed that many saliency methods produce overlapping explanations across dis-
tinct class labels [Krishna et al., 2022], limiting their ability to convey what distinguishes one class
from another. In CASE, we begin by computing the gradient of the class score su with respect to the
activation map A for the target class u. We then suppress the components of this gradient that are
aligned with an average gradient vector derived from a contrast set, i.e., the classes most frequently
confused with u. This orthogonalization removes shared attribution directions and emphasizes fea-
tures that are uniquely predictive of u.
3.3
Confusion-Based Contrast Set Selection
To identify an appropriate contrast set, CASE uses the model’s confusion matrix M ∈RC×C,
computed on a held-out validation set. For a given class u, we extract the top-k most confused
alternatives:
V = arg
max
v∈C\{u} M[u, v]
(2)
Algorithm 1 CASE with Confusion-Based Contrast
1: Input: Bottleneck activation maps A ∈RN×H×W ; Confusion matrix M ∈RC×C; Target class
u ∈C; Number of contrast classes k; Upsampling factor β
2: Output: Saliency map S ∈RH×W
3: Compute target gradient: γu = ∇Asu
4: Identify top-k confused classes:
V = arg
max
v∈C\{u} M[u, v]
5: Initialize contrast gradient accumulator: ¯γ = 0
6: for each v ∈V do
γv = ∇Asv
¯γ += γv
9: end for
10: ¯γ /= k
// Mean contrast gradient
11: Project γu onto orthogonal complement of ¯γ:
u = γu −⟨γu, ¯γ⟩
∥¯γ∥2 + ϵ · ¯γ
12: Compute saliency:
S =
 max
u · A, 0
This behaviorally grounded approach ensures that the contrast set V consists of labels that the model
empirically struggles to distinguish from u, rather than relying on semantic priors or embedding
similarity. The mean gradient across this set is used to define a shared attribution direction to sup-
press.
3.4
Uniquely Discriminative Features
Let Du denote the set of features positively contributing to class u, and let Dv represent those for a
contrast class v ∈V. The goal of CASE is to approximate the uniquely discriminative feature set:
U V
u = Du \
v∈V
(3)
By suppressing attribution that overlaps with the contrast set, CASE highlights only those features
that are uniquely predictive of the target class. For example, distinguishing tiger shark from great
white shark involves removing marine features common to both, while retaining subtle class-specific
traits.
3.5
Saliency Map Generation
To construct the final saliency map, CASE computes the orthogonal projection of the target gradient
γu = ∇Asu against the average contrast gradient ¯γ, where:
¯γ = 1
v∈V
∇Asv
(4)
The projection is given by:
u = γu −⟨γu, ¯γ⟩
∥¯γ∥2 + ϵ · ¯γ
(5)
This removes shared directional components between γu and the contrast set. The resulting class-
specific saliency map is computed via a weighted sum over the activation maps and passed through
a ReLU and upsampling step:
S =
 ReLU
u · A
(6)
Here, A ∈RC×H×W denotes the final convolutional activation tensor, and ↑β indicates bilinear
upsampling to input resolution. This formulation yields saliency maps that emphasize evidence
uniquely associated with the predicted class and suppress attribution that generalizes across visually
similar alternatives.
Experiments
This section presents our empirical evaluation of saliency method performance with a focus on class
sensitivity and explanation faithfulness. We structure our analysis around two guiding research
questions.
4.1
Research Questions
RQ1: How does CASE compare to existing saliency methods in isolating class-specific evidence
across architectures?
RQ2: Can CASE improve class sensitivity without compromising explanation fidelity?
4.2
RQ1: Class Sensitivity
RQ1 aims to determine whether saliency methods meaningfully distinguish between class labels
when generating explanations for the same input. For each image, we generate saliency maps using
the top-1 and top-2 predicted class labels and compute the overlap between their top-k most salient
pixels. High overlap would indicate that a method tends to highlight the same regions regardless of
class label, suggesting poor class sensitivity.
To quantify this behavior, we use the feature agreement metric proposed by [Krishna et al., 2022],
which computes the proportion of shared features among the top-k salient pixels:
F(E, E′, k) = |{f : f ∈t(E, E′, k)}|
(7)
where E and E′ are saliency maps for two different class labels, and t(E, E′, k) returns the inter-
section of the top-k salient features for both.
We compute this score across a large sample of validation images for each method. A one-sided
Wilcoxon signed-rank test is then applied to assess whether the observed agreement scores are sig-
nificantly lower than would be expected under class-insensitive behavior.
The null hypothesis is that the median agreement between saliency maps for the top-1 and top-2
class labels is greater than or equal to 50%. A statistically significant rejection of this hypothesis
indicates that the method produces class-distinct explanations.
H0 :
Median
 F(E, E′, k)
≥0.50
H1 :
Median
 F(E, E′, k)
< 0.50
(8)
4.3
RQ2: Explanation Faithfulness
RQ2 evaluates whether CASE produces more faithful saliency maps compared to baseline methods.
We define explanation faithfulness as the degree to which the most salient regions identified by a
method correspond to regions truly influential to the model’s prediction.
To measure this, we ablate the top-k most salient regions identified by each method and observe the
resulting drop in classification confidence for the predicted class. Larger confidence drops indicate
that the identified regions were more influential to the model’s decision, and therefore reflect greater
faithfulness.
We compute the confidence drop for each method across the same set of evaluation samples and
apply a paired t-test to compare CASE against each baseline. This enables a controlled comparison
of attribution fidelity while accounting for variability across inputs.
The null hypothesis is that the mean confidence drop from ablating CASE’s top-k salient regions is
less than or equal to the mean drop from the baseline method. Rejection of this hypothesis indicates
that CASE produces significantly more faithful explanations.
H0 :
Mean
 DCASE
≤Mean
 Dbaseline
H1 :
Mean
 DCASE
> Mean
 Dbaseline
(9)
4.4
Models, Datasets, and Methods
Our evaluation includes four pre-trained image classification models:
ResNet-50, VGG-19,
DenseNet-201, and ConvNeXt-Large [He et al., 2015, Liu et al., 2022, Huang et al., 2016]. Models
are evaluated on two standard datasets: ImageNet [Deng et al., 2009], which offers broad cate-
gory diversity across 1,000 classes, and CIFAR-100 [Krizhevsky, 2009], which contains 100 object
categories drawn from 20 coarse-grained superclasses. CIFAR-100 consists of low-resolution nat-
ural images (32 × 32) covering a wide range of everyday concepts such as animals, vehicles, and
household objects.
For each model and dataset, we randomly sample 1000 validation images, retaining only those for
which the top-1 prediction is correct. All models are evaluated using publicly available pretrained
model without fine-tuning. 3
We compare CASE against six representative saliency methods: Grad-CAM, Grad-CAM++, Score-
CAM, Ablation-CAM, and LayerCAM. Each method is applied using standard configurations with
a shared backbone to ensure consistency. All evaluation procedures are applied identically across
methods.
Results
5.1
Class Sensitivity Analysis
To evaluate whether existing saliency methods produce class-sensitive explanations, we compute
the top-5% feature agreement between saliency maps for the top-1 and top-2 predicted classes on
the same input image. High agreement implies that the method highlights largely the same features
regardless of the target class, violating the class-specificity criterion.
To complement the quantitative results, Figure 3 presents a visual comparison of masked saliency
regions across methods. For each input, we show the masked top-1 and top-2 class explanations
produced by Grad-CAM variants, ScoreCAM, LayerCAM, and CASE on a ResNet model. Meth-
ods like ScoreCAM and Grad-CAM produce visually indistinct explanations across labels, whereas
CASE consistently isolates class-specific evidence.
We perform this analysis across two benchmark datasets (ImageNet and CIFAR-100) and four pop-
ular convolutional architectures (ResNet, DenseNet, VGG, ConvNeXt). For each method–model–
dataset combination, we run a one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test to evaluate the null hypothesis
that the median agreement is greater than or equal to 50%. A statistically significant rejection of the
null (p < 0.05) indicates that the method produces class-distinct explanations in that setting.
Table 1 reports the p-values. For each entry, if p < 0.05, we reject the null hypothesis and conclude
that the method produces significantly different saliency maps for the top-1 and top-2 class labels.
If p ≥0.05, we fail to reject the null and cannot conclude that the explanations differ.
Across all architectures, CASE consistently rejects the null hypothesis with high confidence (p <
0.0001), demonstrating robust class sensitivity. ScoreCAM also performs well on most models but
fails on VGG. In contrast, traditional methods like Grad-CAM and AblationCAM frequently fail to
distinguish between top-1 and top-2 saliency maps, especially on ResNet and VGG. Interestingly,
DenseNet stands out as the most sensitive architecture: nearly all methods, even weak baselines,
achieve significance. These trends support the claim that DenseNet’s internal representations are
more class-discriminative, and highlight that CASE provides the most consistent and architecture-
agnostic signal separation.
3Unless otherwise specified
Original Image
Water
Ouzel
American
Chameleon
Valley
Ablation-CAM
Grad-CAM
Grad-CAM++
LayerCAM
ScoreCAM
CASE
Figure 3: Class sensitivity comparison across saliency methods. Each row shows the original image
and saliency-based feature masking for the top 5 % of the most salient pixels for the top-2 predicted
classes. The methods compared are Grad-CAM, Grad-CAM++, ScoreCAM, AblationCAM, Layer-
CAM, and CASE. For each method, the left masked output corresponds to the most probable class,
and the right to the second-most probable class. Row 1: Water ouzel vs. Oystercatcher; Row 2:
Green lizard vs. American chameleon; Row 3: Valley vs. Cliff. Methods like ScoreCAM often pro-
duce visually identical or absent explanations, highlighting a lack of class-specificity. In contrast,
CASE consistently isolates distinct evidence for each class label.
Table 1: Wilcoxon signed-rank test p-values for top-5% agreement between saliency maps of top-
1 and top-2 predicted class labels. Models are pretrained on ImageNet. Null hypothesis: median
agreement ≥50%. Bolded entries indicate significant rejection of the null at p < 0.05.
Method
ConvNeXt
DenseNet
ResNet
VGG
AblationCAM
< .0001
CASE
< .0001
< .0001
< .0001
< .0001
Grad-CAM
0.8734
< .0001
Grad-CAM++
0.0179
< .0001
< .0001
LayerCAM
< .0001
< .0001
ScoreCAM
< .0001
< .0001
< .0001
5.1.1
Robustness to Training Seeds (DenseNet on CIFAR-100)
To test whether the class sensitivity observed in DenseNet is robust to training randomness, we
retrained DenseNet-201 on CIFAR-100 using five different random seeds. We then re-evaluated the
saliency methods using the RQ1 procedure for each independently trained model.
As shown in Figure 4, the relative class sensitivity rankings of methods remain consistent across
seeds, and all methods continue to reject the null hypothesis. These findings suggest that DenseNet’s
ability to produce class-distinct saliency maps is a stable property of the architecture and not an
artifact of optimization variability.
5.2
Ablation Study: Channel Sparsity and Discriminative Structure
The results in RQ1 reveal that DenseNet exhibits uniquely consistent class sensitivity across saliency
methods. To understand this behavior, we analyze the channel-wise activation patterns of the layer
used for saliency attribution in each architecture.
For each model, we extract activations from the target convolutional layer used in RQ1 and compute
the number of channels that are active per input. A channel is considered active if its spatially pooled
activation exceeds a small threshold τ:
ˆac =
i=1
j=1
Ac(i, j),
Active if ˆac > τ,
(10)
where Ac denotes the activation map for channel c. For each class, we compute the mean number of
active channels across correctly predicted validation examples.
grad_cam
ablation_cam
grad_cam_plus_plus
score_cam
layer_cam
Saliency Method
Mean Agreement (%)
Distribution of Mean Agreement Across Runs
Figure 4: Mean agreement scores across seeds for each method (DenseNet, CIFAR-100). Lower
values indicate more class-distinct saliency.
Table 2:
RQ1 class sensitivity results when using features.norm5 (final normalization layer)
instead of the final convolutional layer in DenseNet-201.
Method
DenseNet (norm5 layer)
AblationCAM
CASE
< 0.0001
Grad-CAM
Grad-CAM++
LayerCAM
ScoreCAM
< 0.0001
We observe a striking pattern in DenseNet. When using τ = 0.001, the final convolutional layer
(features.denseblock4.denselayer32.conv2) exhibits extremely sparse activation, averag-
ing fewer than 20 active channels per class. This is in stark contrast to other architectures, whose
corresponding attribution layers activate several hundred channels per class on average. This trend
is illustrated in Figure 6, which shows the kernel density estimates (KDE) of mean active channels
per class across architectures.
To determine whether this sparsity was a general property of the DenseNet architecture or
a consequence of layer selection, we repeated the analysis using an alternative target layer:
features.norm5, the final batch normalization layer preceding global pooling. As shown in Fig-
ure 5, this layer exhibits dramatically higher activation density—nearly all channels are active per
class, with the KDE peaking around 1050 channels.
Notably, when we re-ran RQ1 using features.norm5, the final normalization layer in DenseNet-
201, instead of the final convolutional layer, the results were markedly different. As shown in
Table 2, most saliency methods failed to reject the null hypothesis, indicating that their explanations
did not significantly differ across class labels. This stands in sharp contrast to the results reported in
Table 1 for the convolutional layer, where nearly all methods achieved significant class sensitivity.
These findings reinforce the conclusion that saliency quality is highly sensitive to layer choice, and
that DenseNet’s class-distinct explanations are driven by the sparse and selective representations
encoded in its final convolutional layer. Notably, CASE retains its class sensitivity even under this
more diffuse, high-activation regime.
These findings suggest that DenseNet’s final convolutional layer encodes highly selective and class-
discriminative features. While fewer channels activate, the identity of those channels varies mean-
ingfully with class, enabling saliency methods to produce distinct explanations. This aligns with the
Mean Active Channels Per Class
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
KDE of Mean Active Channels Per Class for DenseNet Layers
Model
model.features.norm5
model.features.conv2
Figure
Kernel
density
estimate
(KDE)
mean
active
channels
per
class
for
two
attribution
layers
DenseNet-201.
The
final
convolutional
layer
(features.denseblock4.denselayer32.conv2) exhibits extremely sparse activation, with
fewer than 20 active channels per class. In contrast, the normalization layer (features.norm5)
activates nearly all channels.
Despite its sparsity, the final convolutional layer yields more
class-sensitive saliency maps, underscoring the importance of selecting structurally discriminative
layers for attribution.
DenseNet architecture’s design: its dense connectivity may lead to late-stage layers specializing in
compact, high-value features with minimal redundancy.
In contrast, architectures like VGG and ConvNeXt exhibit broad activation across many chan-
nels, likely reflecting shared or distributed features that dilute class-specific signals in the saliency
maps. Thus, we posit that channel-level sparsity coupled with discriminative selectivity explains
why DenseNet supports stronger class-distinct explanations, even when using a layer with minimal
activation, whereas dense activation may obscure discriminative attribution.
5.3
Explanation Fidelity
To assess the faithfulness of saliency methods, we measure the change in classification confidence
after ablating the top-k most salient pixels identified by each method. For each image, we compute
the softmax confidence of the predicted class before and after ablation. The difference reflects the
influence of the identified regions on the model’s output.
For each method, we compute the average confidence drop and compare it to that of CASE using a
paired t-test. The null hypothesis states that the mean confidence drop of the method is greater than
or equal to that of CASE. A statistically significant p-value (p < 0.05) supports rejecting the null in
favor of the alternative, that CASE yields a higher mean drop.
Table 3 presents the results across all four architectures. On ConvNeXt, CASE significantly out-
performs AblationCAM and LayerCAM, while showing no statistical difference from Grad-CAM,
Grad-CAM++, or ScoreCAM. On DenseNet and ResNet, no baseline method differs significantly
from CASE, indicating comparable levels of confidence drop.
On VGG, three methods, Grad-
CAM++, LayerCAM, and ScoreCAM, yield significantly higher drops than CASE, while the re-
maining methods are not statistically distinguishable.
Mean Active Channels Per Class
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
KDE of Mean Active Channels Per Class for Each Model
Model
VGG
ConvNeXt
ResNet
DenseNet
Figure 6:
Distribution of per-class mean active channel counts across architectures. DenseNet
shows the most sparse channel activations, with most classes activating fewer than 20 channels. In
contrast, ResNet, VGG, and ConvNeXt activate substantially more channels on average.
Table 3:
Mean confidence drop and standard deviation after ablating the top-k salient pixels for
each method on four architectures. Higher drop implies greater attribution faithfulness. p-values are
from paired t-tests comparing each method to CASE (per model); bolded values indicate the highest
mean confidence drop for a given model.
Method
ConvNeXt
DenseNet
ResNet
VGG
Mean
Mean
Mean
Mean
AblationCAM
.1696
.2409
.00568
.1140
.2272
.65943
.1339
.2532
.21707
.1354
.2473
.51132
CASE
.2052
.3042
.1163
.2274
.1411
.2561
.1317
.2420
Grad-CAM
.1919
.2758
.3544
.1131
.2226
.53783
.136
.2501
.37022
.1328
.2433
.84450
Grad-CAM++
.1872
.2860
.22602
.1244
.2417
.13240
.1395
.2584
.78072
.1020
.2096
< .0001
LayerCAM
.1686
.2783
.00988
.1248
.2393
.10838
.1405
.2603
.92128
.1539
.2650
< .0001
ScoreCAM
.2059
.3104
.9665
.1248
.2366
.10598
.1349
.2536
.28969
.1473
.2590
.00645
Discussion
6.1
RQ1: Class Sensitivity of Saliency Methods
The results in Table 1 demonstrate that the ability of saliency methods to produce class-specific
explanations varies substantially across model architectures. DenseNet stands out for its consistent
rejection of the null hypothesis across all tested saliency methods, indicating robust class-distinct
attribution. In contrast, architectures like VGG and ResNet fail to produce class-sensitive maps
under several methods, notably Grad-CAM and AblationCAM. ScoreCAM achieves broader con-
sistency, performing well on both DenseNet and ResNet, while methods such as LayerCAM and
Grad-CAM++ show stronger dependency on the underlying architecture.
These trends suggest that class sensitivity is shaped not only by the saliency algorithm but also by
architectural factors. DenseNet’s dense connectivity and feature reuse mechanisms may enable more
granular and disentangled activations that preserve class-conditional variation late into the network.
However, isolating which architectural features are responsible required targeted ablations.
Ablation: Robustness to Training Seed Variation
To test whether the class sensitivity of DenseNet might be a byproduct of training stochasticity, we
retrained DenseNet-201 on CIFAR-100 using five random seeds. As shown in Figure 4, the mean
agreement distributions across methods remain consistent across all runs. All saliency methods
continue to reject the null hypothesis under the RQ1 test, confirming that the class sensitivity is not
merely due to favorable initialization but is instead a robust property of the model. This affirms the
role of architecture in enabling class-discriminative explanations.
Ablation: The Role of Layer Selection
We further investigated whether DenseNet’s class sensitivity could be attributed to the specific layer
used for attribution. While conventional practice often selects the final convolutional layer for
saliency computation, we found that features.denseblock4.denselayer32.conv2, the final
convolution in DenseNet-201, exhibited unusually sparse activation. As shown in Figure 6, this layer
activates, on average, fewer than 20 channels per class when using a low threshold of τ = 0.001,
compared to several hundred in VGG, ResNet, and ConvNeXt.
Despite this sparsity, RQ1 results reveal that saliency methods still produce highly class-distinct ex-
planations when using this layer. We interpret this to mean that although few channels are active,
their activation patterns are highly class-specific. In other words, DenseNet leverages a compact,
selective set of features for each class, which aids saliency methods in isolating discriminative re-
gions.
Importantly, when we re-ran RQ1 using an alternative attribution layer, features.norm5, the re-
sults were less consistent. Not all methods were able to reject the null hypothesis in this configura-
tion. This shift confirms that layer choice significantly affects explanation quality, even within the
same architecture.
While features.norm5 may appear more appropriate due to its proximity to the classifier and its
aggregation of upstream features, our findings reveal that this aggregation may inadvertently ho-
mogenize activations across classes. As shown in Figure 5, norm5 activates nearly all channels
uniformly, reducing the saliency method’s ability to isolate class-specific signals. In contrast, the
final convolutional layer, though sparsely activated, preserves more localized and class-distinct acti-
vation patterns. This highlights a key insight: layers closer to the classifier are not always optimal for
attribution, especially when their role is to smooth or normalize a wide range of features. Selective,
structurally discriminative layers may offer greater fidelity in class-sensitive explanation tasks.
The ablation in Table 2 underscores that effective attribution depends not only on proximity to the
classifier, but also on the structural selectivity of the chosen layer. These results motivate the need
to treat attribution layer selection as a principled design decision, rather than a fixed convention.
Analysis: Consistency of CASE Across Architectures
Notably, CASE is the only method that consistently rejects the null hypothesis across all four model
architectures in RQ1. This consistency is especially striking on VGG and ResNet, where most
traditional methods fail to distinguish between class labels. While ScoreCAM and Grad-CAM++
perform well on specific models, their sensitivity is not uniformly observed. In contrast, CASE
provides a robust, architecture-agnostic mechanism for isolating class-specific evidence.
This consistent class sensitivity suggests that the contrastive subtraction in CASE effectively sup-
presses overlapping or shared attribution components, allowing more discriminative features to
emerge, even in architectures where representations are otherwise more entangled. Specifically,
CASE operates by isolating a refined subset of the discriminative feature set Du ( Equation 1) by
subtracting the shared components identified in contrast classes V ( Equation 2). This process ap-
proximates the uniquely discriminative feature set U V
u ( Equation 3), which excludes any features
that also support confused alternatives. The effectiveness of this subtraction is evidenced by CASE’s
consistent rejection of the null in RQ1, even on architectures where other methods fail. Importantly,
this performance is achieved without architecture-specific tuning or structural assumptions, indicat-
ing that CASE generalizes well across different model types.
Together, these ablations support the following main findings:
• Layer selection is critical: The choice of attribution layer strongly determines whether
saliency maps are class-specific. Even within the same model, different layers can produce
radically different results under RQ1.
• Channel activity analysis is diagnostic: Measuring mean active channels per class reveals
which layers exhibit class-variant structure. Sparse but selective layers, like DenseNet’s
final convolution, are particularly effective for producing distinct saliency maps.
• CASE yields robust class sensitivity: Unlike other methods, CASE consistently produces
class-distinct explanations across architectures, underscoring the effectiveness of its con-
trastive formulation.
6.2
RQ2: Explanation Fidelity of Saliency Methods
The results in Table 3 indicate that CASE achieves statistically significant confidence drops compared
to AblationCAM and LayerCAM on ConvNeXt, and performs comparably to the strongest baselines
on DenseNet and ResNet. On VGG, several methods: Grad-CAM++, LayerCAM, and ScoreCAM,
achieve higher confidence drops than CASE, though only Grad-CAM++ and LayerCAM are signifi-
cant.
These findings suggest that CASE performs on par with the most widely used attribution methods
overall, while providing substantial improvements over weaker baselines. However, attribution fi-
delity, as measured by the drop in confidence when salient regions are masked, does not always
align with class sensitivity. A method may highlight features that are distinct across classes (in-
dicating high RQ1 sensitivity), yet some of these features may exert less influence on the model’s
output confidence than shared, highly activated regions. As a result, saliency maps that emphasize
uniquely discriminative features may yield relatively modest confidence drops, even if they are more
class-specific and interpretable.
Conversely, saliency methods that emphasize broadly activated or background regions may achieve
larger confidence drops when those areas are occluded, despite failing to differentiate between
classes. This illustrates a key tension: optimizing for overall model confidence may sometimes
come at the cost of specificity, and vice versa.
The combined results from RQ1 and RQ2 suggest that CASE addresses a major limitation of existing
methods, class-insensitivity, without sacrificing attribution fidelity. While it does not uniformly
outperform other methods in confidence drop, its consistently high class specificity represents a
complementary strength. This tradeoff makes CASE a valuable addition to the saliency toolbox,
particularly in applications that demand clear differentiation between competing class explanations.
Conclusion and Future Directions
We presented CASE, a contrastive activation-based saliency method that isolates class-specific sig-
nals by suppressing attribution shared with competing labels. Unlike conventional CAM-style tech-
niques, CASE consistently generates visual explanations that are more class-distinct and aligned with
the model’s internal decision-making.
To validate this, we introduced a diagnostic framework for measuring class sensitivity via top-k
feature agreement, and assessed explanation fidelity through confidence drop analysis. Across mod-
els and datasets, CASE outperforms or matches existing methods in class specificity and attribution
faithfulness.
Our findings also highlight the overlooked influence of architectural features, such as activation
sparsity and layer selectivity, on the quality of visual explanations. These insights suggest that
saliency methods and model design should be considered jointly, not in isolation.
Future work will focus on adaptive strategies for selecting contrast classes, optimizing runtime, and
extending CASE to more complex tasks like multi-label classification and multimodal reasoning.
Ultimately, we see CASE as a step toward saliency methods that not only visualize what a model
sees, but explain what truly sets its decisions apart.
Limitations
Formulation Constraints
While CASE improves class sensitivity and attribution fidelity, several limitations remain. First,
the method relies on selecting contrastive classes using a confusion matrix, which assumes stable
and non-overlapping class relationships. This assumption may break down in low-data regimes or
highly imbalanced classification settings. Second, CASE operates on a pairwise contrast between
the top-1 prediction and a single contrast class. Extending the formulation to support multi-class
or soft-weighted contrast could provide more comprehensive attribution, but this direction remains
unexplored.
Evaluation Constraints
Finally, our evaluation is limited to image classification tasks with a single ground-truth label. It is
unclear how CASE generalizes to more complex settings such as multi-label classification, hierarchi-
cal taxonomies, or vision-language models, where class-conditioned reasoning may involve richer
semantics and structured dependencies.
Computational Overhead
While CASE introduces minimal architectural dependencies, it incurs additional computational cost
relative to standard CAM methods. This is primarily due to the need to compute gradients with
respect to multiple contrast classes and perform vector projections at inference time. The added cost
scales with the number of contrastive classes k, although in practice we find that small values (e.g.,
k = 3) suffice for strong performance. Optimizing the gradient computation pipeline and exploring
approximation strategies (e.g., gradient caching or subspace projection) are potential directions for
reducing runtime overhead in future deployments.