Academic Editor: Thomas Lindner
Received: 12 April 2025
Revised: 8 May 2025
Accepted: 10 May 2025
Published: 12 May 2025
Citation: Gundogan, E. A Novel
Hybrid Deep Learning Model
Enhanced with Explainable AI for
Brain Tumor Multi-Classification from
MRI Images. Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 5412.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app15105412
Copyright: © 2025 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
A Novel Hybrid Deep Learning Model Enhanced with
Explainable AI for Brain Tumor Multi-Classification from
MRI Images
Esra Gundogan
Software Engineering Department, Firat University, 23190 Elazig, Turkey; egundogan@firat.edu.tr
Abstract: The life span and quality of a patient are greatly diminished by a brain tumor,
a type of cancer. For patients, early diagnosis and effective treatment are very significant
in this respect. To assist medical professionals in this difficult and error-prone process
and improve both the accuracy and interpretability of the model, this study proposes a
new hybrid deep learning model enhanced with explainable artificial intelligence for brain
tumor multi-classification from MRI images. It integrates a customized CNN model for
feature extraction from images and the optimized XGBoost method with high classification
success. It also incorporates Grad-CAM, which makes the black-box structure of the
model transparent and the decision-making process more understandable. The proposed
model classified four different brain tumors, namely glioma, meningioma, notumor and
pituitary, with 99.77% accuracy and demonstrated superior performance when compared
with existing methods. The results show that a robust, interpretable and high-performance
hybrid classification model has been developed for brain tumor detection.
Keywords: brain tumor classification; deep learning; Grad-CAM; XAI; XGBoost
1. Introduction
Masses created by cells growing improperly in the brain are called brain tumors [1].
They occur in various sizes and shapes as benign and malignant. Benign tumors grow
more slowly and cause less damage to brain tissues. Malignant tumors grow faster than
benign ones and cause more damage, creating an extremely dangerous situation for human
life. Although the cause of brain tumors is unknown, environmental and genetic factors,
and some types of radiation, are effective in tumor formation. Along with these two forms
of brain tumor, other common tumors are pituitary, glioma, and meningioma. A typically
benign tumor called a meningioma forms on the brain and spinal cord’s meninges [2].
Surgery or radiation therapy can be used to treat this slow-growing tumor that gradually
presses against the surrounding tissues. Pituitary tumors are often benign and arise from
aberrant pituitary gland cell proliferation. Hormone deficits and visual issues may result
from it [3]. The most prevalent malignant tumor is glioma. Approximately one-third of
brain malignancies are caused by it. The prognosis for glioblastoma, the late stage of glioma,
is dismal and ranges from one to one and a half years after diagnosis [4].
Benign or malignant tumors grow over time and create high pressure inside the skull.
The brain tissues are damaged by this pressure effect. In order to minimize this damage
and increase the patient’s survival rate, the brain tumor should be detected as early and
accurately as possible. In addition to the expertise of radiologists, imaging techniques
are also of great importance in tumor detection. There are modalities such as computed
https://doi.org/10.3390/app15105412
2 of 23
tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), X-rays and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) to diagnose brain tumors [5]. MRI is more useful than other methods and
is one of the most efficient techniques to obtain detailed information about the anatomy,
location, shape, and size of the tumor [6].
Brain tumors are a health problem with high mortality rates worldwide. Early detec-
tion of tumors, making the correct diagnosis and starting appropriate treatment as soon
as possible are very important for the patient’s life expectancy and quality. Traditional
methods used to diagnose brain tumors are based on manual examination of imaging data
by radiologists. However, since these examinations depend on the expertise of the radiolo-
gist, they are open to error, require intensive labor and are time-consuming processes [7].
Performing such a process automatically and as quickly and accurately as possible will
directly affect a patient’s life with the advantage of early diagnosis. The risk of spreading
tumors that are detected at early stages can be prevented, the damage to brain tissues can
be reduced and, since they may be smaller in size, they can be treated at a higher rate,
with treatment methods such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy or surgical intervention. This
reduces mortality rates and significantly improves patient life.
Machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) methods are utilized to automate the
process of manually analyzing medical images. Machine learning methods use classified
data. They classify new data of unknown class by learning features from labeled datasets.
Classification can be undertaken on many datasets, including medical images, and using
many methods [8], such as support vector machines (SVMs), k-nearest neighbor (KNN),
naive Bayes (NB), decision tree (DT) and random forest (RF). Deep learning methods
automatically extract complex features from larger data using artificial neural networks.
Data are processed through many layers and classification is achieved with higher accuracy
rates [9–11]. While ML and DL models have shown notable progress in the highly rapid and
accurate detection of brain tumors [12], their black box nature creates a lack of confidence
in the results. As the explanations for the models’ decisions are unclear, it is difficult for
medical professionals to trust the classification outputs of the models. In these types of
medical applications, where the results obtained will significantly affect the patient’s life,
explainability and interpretability will increase the confidence in the correctness of the
decision. ML and DL models are supported by explainable artificial intelligence (XAI),
which reveals which features or which regions of the image are effective in the decision
made regarding an image, and, thus, transparency and understandability of the decisions
are ensured [13,14]. In this way, medical experts understand the reason for the decisions
made. This enables the model to be used as an aid in making medical diagnoses with
increased confidence in its results.
For classifying brain tumors, a novel hybrid model is proposed in this paper. The
main contributions of this study are as follows:
By fusing the strengths of deep learning models for feature extraction from images
and machine learning for classification, a CNN + XGBoost hybrid model has been
developed for multi-class brain tumor classification.
The study incorporates XAI techniques to improve the interpretability of the results.
This makes it possible to comprehend the decision-making process of the model
in greater detail and offers insightful information about the variables affecting the
classification results.
A reliable and accurate model that can be used by medical professionals is provided,
both by performing high-accuracy multi-classification and by providing visual reasons
for the model outputs.
A comprehensive evaluation showing the ability of the proposed model to effectively
classify brain tumors and the interpretability of results through XAI is provided. This
3 of 23
contributes to the growing medical image classification field by offering a robust and
explainable model.
The paper is structured as follows. For classifying brain tumors, related work in the
literature is presented in Section 2. Our proposed methodology, including the details of the
CNN architecture, XGBoost algorithm, and Grad-CAM method is described in Section 3.
Section 4 offers the results and its performance comparison with other models. Section 5
discusses the general conclusions of the paper.
2. Related Work
There are many studies that have performed binary and multiple classification of
brain tumors using small or large datasets with machine learning and deep learning
methods [15]. It is of great importance to perform brain tumor diagnosis automatically,
quickly and accurately. Therefore, many methods have been proposed to increase accuracy
and performance.
To classify brain tumors, a deep convolutional neural network architecture was pro-
posed by Musallam et al. [16]. The quality of the used MRI images was enhanced by
a three-step preprocessing technique, which produced a 97.72% classification accuracy
for four distinct tumor types. Irsheidat et al. [17] developed a CNN model that used
grayscale MRI input and expanded the dataset to fourteen times its original size. In test
and validation data, the model’s accuracy in predicting the tumor or notumor was 88.25%
and 96.7%, respectively. However, they only tested their model on a smaller dataset and
performed a binary classification. A deep learning model for classification on datasets with
different dimensions and modalities was presented by Sahu et al. [18]. This model uses
an end-to-end cumulative learning strategy (CLS) and multi-weighted new loss (MWNL)
function to reduce the effect of imbalance in the data and the overfitting problem with
regularization functions such as DropOut and DropBlock. A modified RandAugment is
proposed for the limited data problem and the classification success is increased with KNN.
The proposed model outperforms other methods by reaching 99.7% accuracy when applied
to small and imbalanced datasets. Sekhar et al. [19] proposed a model performing feature
extraction with pre-trained GoogleNet and classification with SVM and KNN. Compared
with other models, this model had the highest value accuracy for classifying a 3-class brain
tumor using the CE-MRI Figshare repository and the Harvard Medical Archives. Khairan-
dish et al. [20] proposed a hybrid model that classifies brain tumors as either benign or
malignant by integrating CNN and SVM methods. In the study performed using a BRATS
dataset, images were normalized, important features were selected utilizing a maximally
stable extremal regions method and segmentation was performed. Following that, the
CNN + SVM hybrid model classified the images with 98.4% accuracy.
Recently, XAI methods have become increasingly used to explain model decisions due
to the lack of interpretability and understandability of the outputs obtained from DL and
ML approaches [21]. Gaur et al. [22] proposed a dual-input CNN approach integrating
SHAP and LIME methods to improve the model’s interpretability and classify brain tumors
using MRI images. Utilizing a dual-input CNN model, robustness against noise and metal
artifacts in image quality was ensured and brain tumors were multi-classified with a 94.64%
accuracy rate by managing with low-quality images. Ten distinct transfer learning models
were compared with regard to brain tumor classification performance by Nhlapho et al. [23].
The top-performing models were identified as EfficientNetB0, DenseNet121, and Xception,
while the models’ outputs were interpreted using Grad-CAM++ and Grad-CAM. It was
shown that transfer learning models provide a more efficient training process with the
available data and provide high accuracy classification success. A three-stage method
for brain tumor segmentation and classification was proposed by Saeed et al. [24]. The
4 of 23
DeepLabV3+ model was used for segmentation in the first phase. Images were classed in
the second phase after characteristics were retrieved using the Darknet53 and MobileNetV2
models and fed into the SVM model. In both the first and second stages, hyperparameters
were tuned with Bayesian optimization. In the last stage, the decisions of the model were
explained with XAI techniques. A 98% accuracy rate was achieved for segmentation and
97% for classification.
Upon reviewing the literature, it was discovered that the studies were limited to
small datasets, accuracy rate was low, the classification was made as tumor or notumor
instead of multiple classification, and that the proposed approaches were not supported by
explainable artificial intelligence methods to ensure their reliability. For this purpose, the
proposed study developed a model that classifies a large dataset containing MRI scans for
four different tumor types, and the transparency of the model was provided by visualizing
which region in the image the model’s prediction was focused on with XAI. Furthermore, a
hybrid model was proposed that combines the strengths of both ML and DL.
3. Materials and Methods
This paper proposes a hybrid model by developing a CNN model for brain tumor
multiple classification and combining it with the XGBoost method. In addition, the result
generation process of the model is made more clear and transparent with the integration
of Grad-CAM. The proposed model’s block diagram is displayed in Figure 1. A process
consisting of data preparation, augmentation and preprocessing, building the CNN model
and feature extraction, classification of the extracted features with XGBoost and explanation
of the classification decisions with Grad-CAM is proposed.
Figure 1. Block diagram of the proposed model.
3.1. Dataset and Preprocessing
In this study, a publicly accessible dataset was acquired from kaggle.com by merging
images from the Br35H, SARTAJ, and figshare datasets [25]. Each image is a 512 × 512 jpeg
file. The dataset includes MRI scans of glioma, meningioma, notumor and pituitary brain
tumor types. The dataset contains 7023 images in total, consisting of 1311 test data and
5 of 23
5712 training data. The number of training and test MRI images for each class is detailed in
Table 1. Figure 2 shows sample images for each class in the dataset.
Table 1. Dataset summary.
Tumor Type
Training
Testing
Glioma
Meningioma
Notumor
Pituitary
Total
glioma
meningioma
notumor
pituitary
Figure 2. Sample images from dataset.
Before using the dataset to train the CNN model, data augmentation and preprocessing
steps were applied. First, the TensorFlow/Keras library’s ImageDataGenerator class was
used to apply a variety of data augmentation techniques to the training data. Images were
zoomed (zoom_range = 0.2), rotated at random angles (rotation_range = 20), horizontally
flipped (horizontal_flip = True), shifted (shear_range = 0.2) and vertically and horizontally
shifted (height_shift_range = 0.2, width_shift_range = 0.2) with the given parameter values.
With the fill_mode = ’nearest’ parameter, newly formed pixels were filled with the value of
their nearest neighbors. In this manner, the diversity of the training data was expanded,
it was ensured that more images were used for training and the model’s generalization
ability was strengthened. No augmentation process was applied for the test data. Then,
preprocessing steps were applied to provide better performance by making both the
training and test data suitable for the model. Resizing the images (128 × 128), transforming
grayscale images to RGB images (128 × 128 × 3), and normalizing the pixel values to the
range of 0–1, are the preprocessing techniques used. Lastly, 20% and 80% of the dataset,
respectively, are divided for validation and training.
3.2. Proposed Model
The proposed hybrid model is a three-stage process: feature extraction with a cus-
tomized CNN model, classification with XGBoost, and explainability of classification
predictions with Grad-CAM.
3.2.1. Feature Extraction
Features are extracted with the developed CNN architecture and images are classified
based on these features with XGBoost. For this purpose, the last dense layer of the CNN
architecture that performs classification is removed and the features obtained from other
layers are given to XGBoost as input. The classification success depends on the features
extracted from the CNN model. Therefore, a CNN model that extracts features in a way that
provides high classification accuracy has been developed. To understand the contribution of
replacing the CNN’s fully connected layer with XGBoost, an ablation study was conducted.
6 of 23
According to the results of the ablation study, when only CNN was used, the model
achieved 97.80% accuracy. When the fully connected layer and XGBoost were added to
CNN, the accuracy increased to 98.73%. However, the highest accuracy value of 99.77% was
obtained from the model where only CNN and XGBoost were used together. The results
show that the highest performance is achieved with the proposed system architecture and
that high-level semantic information is preserved and further utilized effectively. Although
the performance of the CNN model is improved by stacking the fully connected layer
outputs with XGBoost, the most successful results are obtained with the proposed model.
In Figure 3, the proposed CNN model architecture is displayed. The model consists
of three convolution layers (Conv2D) with 32, 64 and 128 filters. Each layer uses a 3 × 3
kernel size and the ReLU activation function. While lower-level feature information is
extracted with the first convolution layer, more complex patterns and features are extracted
with the following convolution layers. After each convolution layer, 2 × 2 MaxPooling is
implemented to decrease the computational load by reducing the feature maps’ dimensions
and to increase the model’s ability for generalization. The risk of overfitting is reduced
by applying a 0.3 dropout after convolution layers and a 0.5 dropout after fully connected
layers. The multidimensional feature maps created by the convolution layers are converted
to a one-dimensional vector with the flatten layer and transferred to fully connected
layers (dense layers). These layers employ the ReLU activation function and have 256 and
128 neurons. The model can compute probabilities between four classes thanks to the last
layer’s 4-neuron output layer with a softmax activation function. However, this last layer
was removed when combining with XGBoost.
Figure 3. Proposed CNN model architecture.
The CNN model is trained using certain parameters. Table 2 lists these parameter
values. The Adam algorithm was used for model optimization, and categorical cross-
entropy, which works well for classification into several classes, was used as the loss
function. Training was performed with 32 batch_size and 50 epochs. The model consists of
6,548,868 parameters.
7 of 23
Table 2. Hyperparameter values of CNN model.
Hyperparameter
Value
Optimizer algorithm
Adam
Batch_size
Epoch
Loss function
Cross-Entropy
3.2.2. Classification
Recently, hybrid models have been developed by combining DL and ML methods
to increase the classification success [19,26,27]. Deep learning methods have strong repre-
sentation capabilities. Gradient boosting methods provide high accuracy in classification.
Therefore, a hybrid model that combines XGBoost with the customized CNN model is
proposed in this study. High-level features are extracted from images with CNN, and clas-
sified with high accuracy and speed with XGBoost. The overall performance is increased
by classifying with XGBoost instead of CNN’s fully connected layer and softmax classifier.
XGBoost, proposed by Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin [28], is created by optimizing
the gradient boosting algorithm. Its most important features are high accuracy, preventing
overfitting, handling empty data and speed. It uses gradient boosting decision trees as weak
learners. The model works iteratively and each tree generates a new model by correcting
the errors in the previous trees [29]. Error rates are reduced by using gradient descent. The
goal is to minimize the loss L between the true value y and ˆy given a prediction model f(x).
The loss is stated by Equation (1).
L = ∑(yi −ˆyi)2
(1)
XGBoost uses number of trees (n_estimators), learning rate (learning_rate) and tree
depth (max_depth) parameters and the performance is highly dependent on these parame-
ter values. Therefore, GridSearchCV method is used to determine the correct parameter
values. GridSearchCV is a brute force approach that optimizes the hyperparameters of
machine learning approaches and tries all combinations for the hyperparameter ranges
specified by the users. The performance is calculated for each hyperparameter combina-
tion and the best hyperparameter set is selected. The best parameter values for XGBoost
optimized with GridSearchCV are given in Table 3.
Table 3. Hyperparameter values of XGBoost.
Hyperparameter
Value
n_estimators
learning_rate
0.01
max_depth
3.2.3. Explainability
The outputs of classification models created based on DL or ML techniques are not
transparent enough to clearly show the reasons for model decisions. Therefore, the compre-
hensibility and interpretation of the obtained results becomes difficult. In this case, it is
not reliable for experts to act according to a decision without knowing the reason for this
decision [30]. XAI methods that make the internal workings and decision process of the
model understandable in a way that increases this level of confidence have recently been
integrated into models and more transparent outputs are offered [31]. XAI explanations
are performed at different levels: global, local and semi-local. Global explanations provide
an explanation of the general behavior of the model. They provide an understanding
8 of 23
of the model’s output distribution and help one to understand how it works in general.
They do not provide an explanation based on single samples. Local explanations provide
explanations for specific input samples. The reason for the decision made for a sample is
explained. Semi-local explanations provide local explanations for a group of data consisting
of similar samples.
Grad-CAM is an XAI method that visualizes the results of deep learning models and
makes model decisions explainable [31]. A more transparent result is provided by utilizing
the power of visualization techniques to determine which regions of medical images, such
as X-rays and MRI, the model focuses on [32]. In a classification problem, the regions that
are effective in assigning the class of the image are visualized using heat maps. As the class
output of a model is obtained from the last layers, Grad-CAM is applied to these last layers.
Gradients containing information about the model’s class predictions are obtained. These
gradients are multiplied with the feature maps in each layer. This weighted average shows
which regions affect the model decision more for each class. The resulting weighted feature
maps are converted into heat maps. On these maps, cold colors show regions that are less
considered by the model, while warm colors show regions that are more considered. Thus,
it is clearly shown which regions on the image are effective in creating the class label. This
enhances understanding of how the model makes decisions.
3.3. Performance Evaluation
The performance of classification models is determined using different metrics. These
metrics are intended to assess how well the classifier uses both the predicted and actual
class values. Among these, F1 score, precision, recall and accuracy are the most frequently
utilized. The calculation of these metrics is performed using the confusion matrix. The con-
fusion matrix compares the values predicted by a classification model with its actual values.
This matrix is created using true positives (T P), true negatives (T N), false positives (F P)
and false negatives (F N). Thanks to this matrix, the prediction success of the classification
model according to different classes is obtained by calculating the precision, recall, F1 score
and accuracy metrics. Accuracy is defined via Equation (2) as the percentage of samples
accurately predicted by the model.
Accuracy =
TP+TN
TP+TN+FP +FN
(2)
Precision indicates the proportion of samples that are genuinely positive and is mea-
sured via Equation (3).
Precision =
TP+FP
(3)
Recall demonstrates the proportion of actual positive samples that are correctly pre-
dicted and is calculated via Equation (4).
Recall =
TP+FN
(4)
The harmonic average of the precision and recall scores is denoted as the F1 score and
is defined via Equation (5).
F1-score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precison + Recall
(5)
3.4. Experimental Setup
All experiments for this study were performed using Python 3.12 on a computer with
12 GB of RAM, a 256 GB SSD, a 64-bit operating system, a 2.60 GHz Intel Core i7-6700HQ
9 of 23
CPU and a NVIDIA GeForce 950M. Tensorflow, scikit-learn, os, matplotlib, cv2, numpy,
and the seaborn libraries were used for dataset preprocessing and augmentation, model
creation and analysis of the results.
4. Results and Discussion
The CNN + XGBoost model performance in the multiple classification of brain tumors
will be presented in this section. The contribution of model decision explanations to the
classification process by adding the Grad-CAM method will be discussed. Additionally,
the efficacy of the model will be assessed by comparing the outcomes with other machine
learning methods, pre-trained models and state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, the
efficacy of the model is assessed by comparing the outcomes with other machine learning
methods, pre-trained models and state-of-the-art methods, all tested under the same
experimental conditions. All models were trained and evaluated using the same dataset,
feature sets, preprocessing steps, and data split ratios to ensure consistency and fairness
in comparison.
Four different brain tumors were classified by the CNN + XGBoost model as pituitary,
meningioma, glioma, and notumor. The confusion matrix for classification results is
displayed in Figure 4. The matrix shows that the model generally predicts classes with
high accuracy rates. The model incorrectly identified 1 out of 300 images as meningioma
in the glioma class, whereas it correctly identified 2 out of 306 images as gliomas in the
meningioma class. Such a result depends on the classification ability of the model as well
as the medical characteristics of the tumors. Although glioma and meningioma tumors
originate from different cell types, in some cases their morphological characteristics may be
similar. Large and invasive meningioma can be confused with gliomas. Such meningioma
can spread to deeper areas of the brain and show similar characteristics to gliomas as they
come into contact with the meninges. Therefore, it becomes difficult to distinguish them
from gliomas. While gliomas have a rapidly growing irregular structure, meningioma
grow slowly and affect a limited area. However, some can grow rapidly and show similar
invasive characteristics to gliomas. As a result, it becomes difficult to distinguish such
tumors for the model. Every image in the other two classes was appropriately classified.
A model with a very low rate of misclassification and a high rate of class separation was
produced when a general analysis is performed on the precision, recall, and F1 score values
for each class shown in Table 4.
Figure 4. Confusion matrix of proposed model.
10 of 23
Table 4. CNN + XGBoost model classification results.
Tumor Class
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Glioma
0.993
0.997
0.995
Meningioma
0.998
0.993
0.995
Notumor
1.0
1.0
1.0
Pituitary
1.0
1.0
1.0
Figure 5 shows samples of each class obtained as a result of the classification of MRI
scans by the model. Labels expressed as “True” indicate the actual class of the image, and
the one above shows the class label predicted by the model. Green labels show correctly
classified samples, and red labels indicate incorrectly classified samples. Three samples
whose classes were incorrectly predicted by the model and some correctly classified samples
are visualized. The model generally classified the images correctly. Misclassifications may
be due to the similar structural features of tumors.
Figure 5. Prediction results of proposed model.
In Figure 6a, each column shows three original MRI images and the class labels pre-
dicted by the model for the classes glioma, meningioma, notumor and pituitary, respectively.
In (b), the regions that the model takes into consideration when assigning this class label
are visualized with Grad-CAM. In the generated heat maps, red and yellow colors indicate
the most important regions, while blue and green colors indicate less important regions.
In the glioma image, the tumor is usually located in the deep cerebral regions, and this
region is clearly highlighted in red on the Grad-CAM maps. This shows that the model can
correctly identify the tumor area. In the meningioma image, the model correctly detected
the location of the tumor near the dura mater and the activation maps generally showed
high focus around the lesion. In the notumor image, the model focused on a wider area and
could not highlight a distinct region because there was no tumor. In the pituitary image,
the activation of the model was concentrated in the region where the pituitary gland is
located, indicating that even small and deep-seated tumors can be successfully localized.
These visualizations clearly revealed the regions that should be focused on in the image for
each tumor type and that the model not only achieves classification success but also makes
decisions by taking into account medically meaningful regions, significantly increasing the
interpretability of the model.
11 of 23
Glioma
Meningioma
Notumor
Pituitary
(a)
(b)
Figure 6. Explainability results. (a) Original images and (b) Grad-CAM visualizations.
To verify the generalizability of the proposed model, multiple brain tumor classifica-
tion was performed using a publicly available dataset obtained from kaggle.com, one which
was not used in the training or validation stages of the model. By selecting 500 images for
each class from this dataset, a balanced distribution was created to eliminate overfitting
due to class imbalance. Figure 7 shows the classification results of the proposed model for
12 of 23
the external dataset. As can be seen, the model classified the notumor class without error
and the number of incorrectly classified images in other classes was low. Table 5 shows the
precision, recall and F1 score values for each class. The model achieved 98.90% accuracy on
the external dataset. Although slightly lower than the performance on the original test set,
these results support the generalizability of the model.
Figure 7. Confusion matrix of proposed model for external dataset.
Table 5. CNN + XGBoost model classification results for the external dataset.
Tumor Class
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Glioma
0.997
0.982
0.990
Meningioma
0.970
0.988
0.979
Notumor
0.994
1.0
0.997
Pituitary
0.994
0.986
0.990
4.1. Comparison with Machine Learning Methods
There are many machine learning approaches used to classify various data. SVM,
KNN, DT, NB, RF and CatBoost are the most commonly used methods. These methods
classify data using different parameters, and these values directly affect the classification
success. Therefore, the hyperparameter values were optimized with GridSearchCV and
the best values are given in the Table 6. A more generalizable SVM model was obtained
by using a linear kernel and a low C value. In the classification with KNN, the algorithm
automatically selects the most appropriate method with three neighbors and the Minkowski
distance metric. For DT, the risk of overfitting was reduced by selecting information gain-
based division (entropy) and a maximum depth of 20. For RF, 50 trees were used without
being restricted by the maximum depth. The CatBoost model was configured with a
small learning rate (0.01) and 100 iterations, providing a balanced learning process. To
improve the models’ accuracy and generalization performance, these parameters were
chosen through GridSearchCV optimization.
Table 6. Parameters used for machine learning methods.
Method
Parameters
min_samples_split: 2, criterion: entropy,
min_samples_leaf: 1, max_depth: 20
KNN
algorithm: auto, metric: minkowski, n_neighbors: 3
SVM
gamma: scale, C: 0.1, kernel: linear
max_depth: None, n_estimators: 50
13 of 23
To assess the consistency and robustness of the proposed CNN + ML hybrid models,
the standard deviations of classification accuracy over 10 independent runs were calculated
for each model. In each run, the dataset remained constant, while the training and test
data were resplit by 80–20% with different random selections. During these processes,
the features extracted from the CNN model for each run were classified with machine
learning methods and the accuracy value was calculated. The standard deviation was
calculated over the 10 accuracy scores obtained. In Table 7, the results indicate that the
CNN + XGBoost model not only achieved the highest mean accuracy but also exhibited the
lowest standard deviation, with 0.0025, demonstrating superior stability across different
runs. In contrast, the CNN + RF model showed the highest standard deviation, with 0.0262,
suggesting a higher sensitivity to data partitioning or initialization.
Table 7. Accuracy standard deviations of CNN + ML models.
Model
Std
CNN + SVM
0.0168
CNN + KNN
0.0150
CNN + DT
0.0066
CNN + NB
0.0167
CNN + RF
0.0262
CNN + CatBoost
0.0165
CNN + XGBoost
0.0025
Table 8 compares the proposed CNN + XGBoost model’s performance values with
machine learning techniques for the glioma (G), meningioma (M), tumor (N), and pituitary
(P) classes. According to the results, the use of different ML algorithms together with CNN
causes different performance results in brain tumor classification. The CNN + XGBoost
model has the highest accuracy rate with 99.77% and very high precision, recall and F1
score values were obtained in all classes. All of the samples in two classes were classified
correctly. The CNN + DT model ranked second with 99.16% accuracy rate, while other
models exhibited similar performance in the range of 97.8–98.0% accuracy. The CNN +
RF model has the lowest accuracy rate with 95.66%. These results demonstrate that the
features extracted by CNN are processed most effectively thanks to the powerful classifica-
tion capabilities of XGBoost. The proposed model classified multiple brain tumors more
successfully when compared with other machine learning methods. The confusion matrices
of all models are given in Figure 8. The number of correct and incorrect classifications for all
classes can be seen more clearly from these matrices. These machine learning methods and
XGBoost were combined with the developed CNN model and their classification success
was compared. The results show that the XGBoost method classified images with higher
accuracy based on the features extracted by CNN when compared with these methods.
Table 8. Classification performance comparison of CNN + ML models.
Model
Class Type
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Accuracy (%)
CNN + SVM
0.986
0.950
0.967
98.03
0.951
0.967
0.959
0.992
1.0
0.996
0.987
0.996
0.991
CNN + KNN
0.982
0.953
0.967
97.95
0.954
0.964
0.959
0.992
1.0
0.996
0.983
0.993
0.988
14 of 23
Table 8. Cont.
Model
Class Type
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Accuracy (%)
CNN + DT
0.993
0.983
0.988
99.16
0.980
0.983
0.982
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.990
0.996
0.993
CNN + NB
0.982
0.950
0.966
97.80
0.951
0.957
0.954
0.992
1.0
0.996
0.980
0.996
0.988
CNN + RF
0.955
0.933
0.944
95.66
0.903
0.933
0.918
0.987
0.969
0.978
0.976
0.988
0.982
CNN + CatBoost
0.979
0.950
0.964
97.86
0.948
0.964
0.956
0.992
1.0
0.996
0.986
0.990
0.988
CNN + XGBoost
0.993
0.997
0.995
99.77
0.998
0.993
0.995
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 8. Cont.
15 of 23
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 8. Confusion matrices. (a) CNN + SVM, (b) CNN + KNN, (c) CNN + DT, (d) CNN + NB,
(e) CNN + RF, (f) CNN + CatBoost, and (g) CNN + XGBoost.
4.2. Comparison with Pre-Trained Models
Transfer learning models are frequently used in brain tumor classification [33–35].
Thanks to the use of these models, training time is accelerated and the performance
of the model is increased by using pre-trained neural networks. Instead of training a
model with large datasets, it is sufficient to retrain only the last layers in pre-trained
models. In addition, visual features are well learned and images are classified more
successfully with these features. In this study, DenseNet121, ResNet50, EfficientNetB5,
VGG19, Xception, InceptionV3 and MobileNetV2 from pre-trained models were used for
performance comparison.
For the training and validation processes of the proposed model and pre-trained
models, Figures 9 and 10 show the accuracy and loss values, respectively. Although
VGG19 is stable in training accuracy and loss, there are significant fluctuations in validation
accuracy and loss. This shows that the model overfits the data and has difficulty in
generalizing to new data. Although the other models have occasional fluctuations in terms
of accuracy and loss, they appear to be models that give balanced results. The proposed
model’s training and validation loss decreases in parallel, and its training and validation
accuracies almost overlap. This shows that the model is resistant to overfitting and has a
better generalization performance. As a result, the proposed model stands out as the model
that performs better than other models, with small difference between the training and
validation curves, a continuous decrease in loss values and high accuracy rates.
16 of 23
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 9. Training and validation accuracy curves. (a) DenseNet121, (b) ResNet50, (c) EfficientNetB5,
(d) VGG19, (e) Xception, (f) InceptionV3, (g) MobileNetV2, and (h) the proposed model.
17 of 23
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 10. Training and validation loss curves. (a) DenseNet121, (b) ResNet50, (c) EfficientNetB5,
(d) VGG19, (e) Xception, (f) InceptionV3, (g) MobileNetV2, and (h) the proposed model.
18 of 23
The pre-trained models’ confusion matrices are shown in Figure 11 and the test
accuracy and loss values of these models are shown in Table 9. It misclassified only
three samples and showed a more successful performance than all of the other models,
with a 99.77% accuracy rate. It was by far the most successful model, achieving the
highest accuracy and lowest loss value. InceptionV3 and DenseNet121 achieved the closest
results to the proposed model by exhibiting high performance, with 98.5% and 98.3%
accuracy rates, respectively. Xception (98.1% accuracy, 0.086 loss) and EfficientNetB5 (97.4%
accuracy, 0.090 loss) models have lower performance due to their slightly higher loss values.
ResNet50 is less successful than the other models with a 96.3% accuracy rate. VGG19
(92.7% accuracy, 0.196 loss) and MobileNetV2 (96.1% accuracy, 0.247 loss) are models with
the lowest accuracy and high loss values, and have lower performance when compared
with the others. Overall, the proposed model minimizes misclassifications for four tumor
types and gives more successful results. The features extracted by a customized CNN
structure were combined with a powerful machine learning algorithm such as XGBoost
to provide higher classification accuracy. CNN is quite effective in extracting low- and
high-level features from images, but in some cases it may have difficulty with more complex
data. XGBoost, on the other hand, can perform more accurate and faster classifications
using tree-based structures, especially in cases where the number of features is large and
there are complex data relationships. The combination of CNN + XGBoost combines the
advantages of both models. While CNN extracts high quality features, XGBoost evaluates
the importance of these features and optimizes the classification process. In addition, as the
size of the dataset used in the study is relatively small, pre-trained models carry the risk of
over-training. These models are powerful in terms of learning complex features using very
deep networks; however, they are more expensive in terms of computation and require
very large data. They can be effective especially in very large datasets, but when working
with limited data, difficulties such as slow learning and learning unnecessary features may
be encountered. Experimentally, the proposed CNN + XGBoost structure has given higher
accuracy results than these models based on transfer learning.
(a)
(b)
Figure 11. Cont.
19 of 23
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 11. Confusion matrices. (a) DenseNet121, (b) ResNet50, (c) EfficientNetB5, (d) VGG19,
(e) Xception, (f) InceptionV3, (g) MobileNetV2, and (h) the proposed model.
Table 9. Test accuracy and loss values of pre-trained models.
Model
Accuracy
Loss
DenseNet121
0.983
0.036
ResNet50
0.963
0.010
EfficientNetB5
0.974
0.090
VGG19
0.927
0.196
Xception
0.981
0.086
InceptionV3
0.985
0.048
MobileNetV2
0.961
0.247
Proposed model
0.997
0.005
20 of 23
4.3. Comparison with State-of-the-Art Methods
Demonstrating the model performance against the best available approaches is es-
sential for performance evaluation. In classifying brain tumors, the performance of the
proposed model is highlighted by a comparison with state-of-the-art methods. Such a
comparison helps to determine whether the model is superior in critical aspects such as
accuracy and explainability. The architectures of the models, the type of classification, the
visualization of decisions with explainability method, and the accuracy rate are the criteria
taken into consideration for comparing the CNN + XGBoost model with the state-of-the-art
methods. Table 10 contains information about the methods according to these criteria. Most
models did not use any XAI method for the explainability of the classification results. While
the SVM model has the lowest accuracy rate, with 96.67%, among the other models the
proposed CNN + XGBoost model has the highest accuracy rate, with 99.77%. The proposed
model stands out from other models not only in terms of accuracy but also in terms of
explainability using Grad-CAM. The EfficientNetB0 model fell behind the proposed model
in terms of performance, with 98.72% accuracy when using Grad-CAM. The model that
performed the closest to the proposed model was the NeroNet19 model, which was sup-
ported by the LIME explainability approach and had an accuracy rate of 99.30%. Therefore,
by using Grad-CAM to visualize the decision mechanism, it not only achieves the best
accuracy rate but also increases the model’s reliability, making it the most successful model.
Table 10. Comparison with state-of-the-art methods.
Reference
Class Type
Model
XAI
Accuracy (%)
[36]
Multi
SVM
96.67
[34]
Multi
InceptionV3
97.12
[37]
Binary
DenseNet121
97.86
[38]
Binary
CNN
98.82
[39]
Binary
CNN
98.50
[40]
Binary
VGG16
LRP
97.33
[41]
Multi
NeroNet19
LIME
99.30
[42]
Binary
CNN
98.66
[43]
Multi
EfficientNetB0
Grad-CAM
98.72
Proposed model
Multi
CNN + XGBoost
Grad-CAM
99.77
5. Conclusions
For radiologists, detecting brain tumors is a time-consuming and difficult process.
In addition, since it is based on expertise, the probability of false detection is high. Accu-
rate and fast detection and classification of tumors is of great importance with regard to
determining the appropriate treatment and early diagnosis. In this study, a CNN model
was developed and trained with MRI images and strong features were extracted. Us-
ing the extracted features, the images were classified with the optimized XGBoost. The
proposed model classified four different brain tumors with 99.77% accuracy. When the
performance of XGBoost was compared with other machine learning methods, the de-
cision tree had the closest results with 99.16% accuracy rate. However, compared with
other methods, the highest success rate was obtained by combining the CNN model with
XGBoost. In addition, when the proposed model was compared with pre-trained Efficient-
NetB5, DenseNet121, ResNet50, VGG19, Xception, InceptionV3 and MobileNetV3, the
accuracy rates were 97.49%, 98.33%, 96.36%, 92.79%, 98.18%, 98.51% and 96.13%, respec-
tively. The closest performance belongs to the InceptionV3 model. Overall, the proposed
model outperformed the four pre-trained models in terms of performance. The results
were visualized using the Grad-CAM approach to show which regions the model takes into
account and to increase the model’s reliability. With its high accuracy rate, usage of XAI,
21 of 23
and multiple classification, the proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.
As a result, this study has presented a useful approach to classifying brain tumors based on
performance and explainability.
Funding: This work was supported by the Scientific Research Projects Coordination Unit of Firat
University under Grant No: MF.24.119.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article. Further inquiries can be directed to the author.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.